The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Cask, by Freeman Wills Crofts

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Cask

Author: Freeman Wills Crofts

Release Date: July 4, 2019 [EBook #59854]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CASK ***




Produced by Stephen Lins





                         THE CRIME CLUB

                            VOLUME 25

                               *

                            THE CASK




                        This is the Story

This book introduced to the public a new Master of Detective Fiction,
and Mr. Crofts is now a very famous name indeed to the many
enthusiastic students of detective novels. It has all the great
virtues; a mysterious murder cunningly conceived and carried out; the
strongest suspicion ingeniously thrown on an innocent man; a subtle
alibi brilliantly shattered by an unfaltering process of analysis.
The book is flawless in design and presents an intellectual problem
of supreme interest. The lover of detective stories can want nothing
better. As the _Outlook_ said, “In construction and invention Mr.
Crofts has no living equal.”


                        By the Same Author


THE BOX OFFICE MURDERS                    MYSTERY IN THE CHANNEL

SUDDEN DEATH                                    DEATH ON THE WAY

THE SEA MYSTERY                 INSPECTOR FRENCH’S GREATEST CASE

THE STARVEL TRAGEDY                       THE GROOTE PARK MURDER

THE PONSON CASE                           THE PIT-PROP SYNDICATE

THE CRIME AT GUILDFORD               THE LOSS OF THE JANE VOSPER

             INSPECTOR FRENCH AND THE CHEYNE MYSTERY

                         MAN OVERBOARD




                            THE CASK

                               by

                          FREEMAN WILLS

                             CROFTS



                 [Illustration: publisher's mark]



                          Published for

                         THE CRIME CLUB

                 by COLLINS FORTY-EIGHT PALL MALL

                             LONDON




First Impression     -     -     -     -     June, 1920

Second     ”         -     -     -     -     December, 1921

Third      ”         -     -     -     -     January, 1922

Fourth     ”         -     -     -     -     February, 1923

Fifth      ”         -     -     -     -     May, 1924

Sixth      ”         -     -     -     -     April, 1925

Seventh    ”         -     -     -     -     December, 1926

Eighth     ”         -     -     -     -     January, 1927

Ninth      ”         -     -     -     -     October, 1928

Tenth      ”         -     -     -     -     January, 1931

Eleven     ”         -     -     -     -     September, 1934

Twelfth    ”         -     -     -     -     February, 1935

Thirteenth ”         -     -     -     -     December, 1936

Fourteenth ”         -     -     -     -     July, 1937

Fifteenth  ”         -     -     -     -     January, 1938


                   PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN

         COLLINS CLEAR-TYPE PRESS : LONDON AND GLASGOW

                         COPYRIGHT




                          CONTENTS

                       PART I--LONDON

     I. A STRANGE CONSIGNMENT

    II. INSPECTOR BURNLEY ON THE TRACK

   III. THE WATCHER ON THE WALL

    IV. A MIDNIGHT INTERVIEW

     V. FELIX TELLS A STORY

    VI. THE ART OF DETECTION

   VII. THE CASK AT LAST

  VIII. THE OPENING OF THE CASK


                       PART II--PARIS

    IX. M. LE CHEF DE LA SÛRETÉ

     X. WHO WROTE THE LETTER?

    XI. MM. DUPIERRE ET CIE

   XII. AT THE GARE ST. LAZARE

  XIII. THE OWNER OF THE DRESS

   XIV. M. BOIRAC MAKES A STATEMENT

    XV. THE HOUSE IN THE AVENUE DE L’ALMA

   XVI. INSPECTOR BURNLEY UP AGAINST IT

  XVII. A COUNCIL OF WAR

 XVIII. LEFARGE HUNTS ALONE

   XIX. THE TESTING OF AN ALIBI

    XX. SOME DAMNING EVIDENCE


                PART III--LONDON AND PARIS

   XXI. A NEW POINT OF VIEW

  XXII. FELIX TELLS A SECOND STORY

 XXIII. CLIFFORD GETS TO WORK

  XXIV. MR. GEORGES LA TOUCHE

   XXV. DISAPPOINTMENT

  XXVI. A CLUE AT LAST

 XXVII. LA TOUCHE’S DILEMMA

XXVIII. THE UNRAVELLING OF THE WEB

  XXIX. A DRAMATIC DÉNOUEMENT

   XXX. CONCLUSION




PART I--LONDON




CHAPTER I

A STRANGE CONSIGNMENT

Mr. Avery, managing director of the Insular and Continental Steam
Navigation Company, had just arrived at his office. He glanced at his
inward letters, ran his eye over his list of engagements for the day,
and inspected the return of the movements of his Company’s steamers.
Then, after spending a few moments in thought, he called his chief
clerk, Wilcox.

‘I see the _Bullfinch_ is in this morning from Rouen,’ he said. ‘I
take it she’ll have that consignment of wines for Norton and Banks?’

‘She has,’ replied the chief clerk, ‘I’ve just rung up the dock
office to inquire.’

‘I think we ought to have it specially checked from here. You
remember all the trouble they gave us about the last lot. Will you
send some reliable man down? Whom can you spare?’

‘Broughton could go. He has done it before.’

‘Well, see to it, will you, and then send in Miss Johnson, and I
shall go through the mail.’

The office was the headquarters of the Insular and Continental Steam
Navigation Company, colloquially known as the I. and C., and occupied
the second floor of a large block of buildings at the western end of
Fenchurch Street. The Company was an important concern, and owned a
fleet of some thirty steamers ranging from 300 to 1000 tons burden,
which traded between London and the smaller Continental ports. Low
freights was their specialty, but they did not drive their boats, and
no attempt was made to compete with the more expensive routes in the
matter of speed. Under these circumstances they did a large trade in
all kinds of goods other than perishables.

Mr. Wilcox picked up some papers and stepped over to the desk at
which Tom Broughton was working.

‘Broughton,’ he said, ‘Mr. Avery wants you to go down at once to the
docks and check a consignment of wines for Norton and Banks. It came
in last night from Rouen in the _Bullfinch_. These people gave us a
lot of trouble about their last lot, disputing our figures, so you
will have to be very careful. Here are the invoices, and don’t take
the men’s figures but see each cask yourself.’

‘Right, sir,’ replied Broughton, a young fellow of three-and-twenty,
with a frank, boyish face and an alert manner. Nothing loath to
exchange the monotony of the office for the life and bustle of the
quays, he put away his books, stowed the invoices carefully in his
pocket, took his hat and went quickly down the stairs and out into
Fenchurch Street.

It was a brilliant morning in early April. After a spell of cold,
showery weather, there was at last a foretaste of summer in the air,
and the contrast made it seem good to be alive. The sun shone with
that clear freshness seen only after rain. Broughton’s spirits rose
as he hurried through the busy streets, and watched the ceaseless
flow of traffic pouring along the arteries leading to the shipping.

His goal was St. Katherine’s Docks, where the _Bullfinch_ was
berthed, and, passing across Tower Hill and round two sides of the
grim old fortress, he pushed on till he reached the basin in which
the steamer was lying. She was a long and rather low vessel of some
800 tons burden, with engines amidships, and a single black funnel
ornamented with the two green bands that marked the Company’s boats.
Recently out from her annual overhaul, she looked trim and clean in
her new coat of black paint. Unloading was in progress, and Broughton
hurried on board, anxious to be present before any of the consignment
of wine was set ashore.

He was just in time, for the hatches of the lower forehold, in which
the casks were stowed, had been cleared and were being lifted off as
he arrived. As he stood on the bridge deck waiting for the work to be
completed he looked around.

Several steamers were lying in the basin. Immediately behind, with
her high bluff bows showing over the _Bullfinch’s_ counter, was the
_Thrush_, his Company’s largest vessel, due to sail that afternoon
for Corunna and Vigo. In the berth in front lay a Clyde Shipping
Company’s boat bound for Belfast and Glasgow and also due out that
afternoon, the smoke from her black funnel circling lazily up into
the clear sky. Opposite was the _Arcturus_, belonging to the I. and
C.’s rivals, Messrs. Babcock and Millman, and commanded by ‘Black
Mac,’ so called to distinguish him from the Captain M‘Tavish of
differently coloured hair, ‘Red Mac,’ who was master of the same
Company’s _Sirius_. To Broughton these boats represented links with
the mysterious, far-off world of romance, and he never saw one put to
sea without longing to go with her to Copenhagen, Bordeaux, Lisbon,
Spezzia, or to whatever other delightful-sounding place she was bound.

The fore-hatch being open, Broughton climbed down into the hold armed
with his notebook, and the unloading of the casks began. They were
swung out in lots of four fastened together by rope slings. As each
lot was dealt with, the clerk noted the contents in his book, from
which he would afterwards check the invoices.

The work progressed rapidly, the men straining and pushing to get the
heavy barrels in place for the slings. Gradually the space under and
around the hatch was cleared, the casks then having to be rolled
forward from the farther parts of the hold.

A quartet of casks had just been hoisted and Broughton was turning to
examine the net lot when he heard a sudden shout of ‘Look out, there!
Look out!’ and felt himself seized roughly and pulled backwards. He
swung round and was in time to see the four casks turning over out of
the sling and falling heavily to the floor of the hold. Fortunately
they had only been lifted some four or five feet, but they were heavy
things and came down solidly. The two under were damaged slightly and
the wine began to ooze out between the staves. The others had had
their fall broken and neither seemed the worse. The men had all
jumped clear and no one was hurt.

‘Upend those casks, boys,’ called the foreman, when the damage had
been briefly examined, ‘and let’s save the wine.’

The leaking casks were turned damaged end up and lifted aside for
temporary repairs. The third barrel was found to be uninjured, but
when they came to the fourth it was seen that it had not entirely
escaped.

This fourth cask was different in appearance from the rest, and
Broughton had noted it as not belonging to Messrs. Norton and Banks’
consignment. It was more strongly made and better finished, and was
stained a light oak colour and varnished. Evidently, also, it did not
contain wine, for what had called their attention to its injury was a
little heap of sawdust which had escaped from a crack at the end of
one of the staves.

‘Strange looking cask this. Did you ever see one like it before?’
said Broughton to the I. and C. foreman who had pulled him back, a
man named Harkness. He was a tall, strongly built man with prominent
cheekbones, a square chin and a sandy moustache. Broughton had known
him for some time and had a high opinion of his intelligence and
ability.

‘Never saw nothin’ like it,’ returned Harkness. ‘I tell you, sir,
that there cask ’as been made to stand some knocking about.’

‘Looks like it. Let’s get it rolled back out of the way and turned
up, so as to see the damage.’

Harkness seized the cask and with some difficulty rolled it close to
the ship’s side out of the way of the unloading, but when he tried to
upend it he found it too heavy to lift.

‘There’s something more than sawdust in there,’ he said. ‘It’s the
’eaviest cask ever I struck. I guess it was its weight shifted the
other casks in the sling and spilled the lot.’

He called over another man and they turned the cask damaged end up.
Broughton stepped over to the charge hand and asked him to check the
tally for a few seconds while he examined the injury.

As he was returning across the half-dozen yards to join the foreman,
his eye fell on the little heap of sawdust that had fallen out of the
crack, and the glitter of some bright object showing through it
caught his attention. He stooped and picked it up. His amazement as
he looked at it may be imagined, for it was a sovereign!

He glanced quickly round. Only Harkness of all the men present had
seen it.

‘Turn the ’eap over, sir,’ said the foreman, evidently as surprised
as the younger man, ‘see if there are any more.’

Broughton sifted the sawdust through his fingers, and his
astonishment was not lessened when he discovered two others hidden in
the little pile.

He gazed at the three gold coins lying in his palm. As he did so
Harkness gave a smothered exclamation and, stooping rapidly, picked
something out from between two of the boards of the hold’s bottom.

‘Another, by gum!’ cried the foreman in low tones, ‘and another!’ He
bent down again and lifted a second object from behind where the cask
was standing. ‘Blest if it ain’t a blooming gold mine we’ve struck.’

Broughton put the five sovereigns in his pocket, as he and Harkness
unostentatiously scrutinised the deck. They searched carefully, but
found no other coins.

‘Did you drop them when I dragged you back?’ asked Harkness.

‘I? No, I wish I had, but I had no gold about me.’

‘Some of the other chaps must ’ave then. Maybe Peters or Wilson. Both
jumped just at this place.’

‘Well, don’t say anything for a moment. I believe they came out of
the cask.’

‘Out o’ the cask? Why, sir, ’oo would send sovereigns in a cask?’

‘No one, I should have said; but how would they get among the sawdust
if they didn’t come out through the crack with it?’

‘That’s so,’ said Harkness thoughtfully, continuing, ‘I tell you, Mr.
Broughton, you say the word and I’ll open that crack a bit more and
we’ll ’ave a look into the cask.’

The clerk recognised that this would be irregular, but his curiosity
was keenly aroused and he hesitated.

‘I’ll do it without leaving any mark that won’t be put down to the
fall,’ continued the tempter, and Broughton fell.

‘I think we should know,’ he replied. ‘This gold may have been stolen
and inquiries should be made.’

The foreman smiled and disappeared, returning with a hammer and cold
chisel. The broken piece at the end of the stave was entirely
separated from the remainder by the crack, but was held in position
by one of the iron rings. This piece Harkness with some difficulty
drove upwards, thus widening the crack. As he did so, a little shower
of sawdust fell out and the astonishment of the two men was not
lessened when with it came a number of sovereigns, which went rolling
here and there over the planks.

It happened that at the same moment the attention of the other men
was concentrated on a quartet of casks which was being slung up
through the hatches, the nervousness caused by the slip not having
yet subsided. None of them therefore saw what had taken place, and
Broughton and Harkness had picked up the coins before any of them
turned round. Six sovereigns had come out, and the clerk added them
to the five he already had, while he and his companion
unostentatiously searched for others. Not finding any, they turned
back to the cask deeply mystified.

‘Open that crack a bit more,’ said Broughton. ‘What do you think
about it?’

‘Blest if I know what to think,’ replied the foreman. ‘We’re on to
something mighty queer anyway. ’Old my cap under the crack till I
prize out that there bit of wood altogether.’

With some difficulty the loose piece of the stave was hammered up,
leaving a hole in the side of the barrel some six inches deep by
nearly four wide. Half a capful of sawdust fell out, and the clerk
added to it by clearing the broken edge of the wood. Then he placed
the cap on the top of the cask and they eagerly felt through the
sawdust.

‘By Jehoshaphat!’ whispered Harkness excitedly, ‘it’s just full of
gold!’

It seemed to be so, indeed, for in it were no fewer than seven
sovereigns.

‘That’s eighteen in all,’ said Broughton, in an awed tone, as he
slipped them into his pocket. ‘If the whole cask’s full of them it
must be worth thousands and thousands of pounds.’

They stood gazing at the prosaic looking barrel, outwardly remarkable
only in its strong design and good finish, marvelling if beneath that
commonplace exterior there was indeed hidden what to them seemed a
fortune. Then Harkness crouched down and looked into the cask through
the hole he had made. Hardly had he done so when he sprang back with
a sudden oath.

‘Look in there, Mr. Broughton!’ he cried in a suppressed tone. ‘Look
in there!’

Broughton stooped in turn and peered in. Then he also recoiled, for
there, sticking up out of the sawdust, were the fingers of a hand.

‘This is terrible,’ he whispered, convinced at last they were in the
presence of tragedy, and then he could have kicked himself for being
such a fool.

‘Why, it’s only a statue,’ he cried.

‘Statue?’ replied Harkness sharply. ‘Statue? That ain’t no statue.
That’s part of a dead body, that is. And don’t you make no mistake.’

‘It’s too dark to see properly. Get a light, will you, till we make
sure.’

When the foreman had procured a hand-lamp Broughton looked in again
and speedily saw that his first impression was correct. The fingers
were undoubtedly those of a woman’s hand, small, pointed, delicate,
and bearing rings which glinted in the light.

‘Clear away some more of the sawdust, Harkness,’ said the young man
as he stood up again. ‘We must find out all we can now.’

He held the cap as before, and the foreman carefully picked out with
the cold chisel the sawdust surrounding the fingers. As its level
lowered, the remainder of the hand and the wrist gradually became
revealed. The sight of the whole only accentuated the first
impression of dainty beauty and elegance.

Broughton emptied the cap on to the top of the cask. Three more
sovereigns were found hidden in it, and these he pocketed with the
others. Then he turned to re-examine the cask.

It was rather larger than the wine-barrels, being some three feet six
high by nearly two feet six in diameter. As already mentioned, it was
of unusually strong construction, the sides, as shown by the broken
stave, being quite two inches thick. Owing possibly to the difficulty
of bending such heavy stuff, it was more cylindrical than barrel
shaped, the result being that the ends were unusually large, and this
no doubt partly accounted for Harkness’s difficulty in upending it.
In place of the usual thin metal bands, heavy iron rings clamped it
together.

On one side was a card label, tacked round the edges and addressed in
a foreign handwriting: ‘M. Léon Felix, 141 West Jubb Street,
Tottenham Court Road, London, W., via Rouen and long sea,’ with the
words ‘Statuary only’ printed with a rubber stamp. The label bore
also the sender’s name: ‘Dupierre et Cie., Fabricants de la Sculpture
Monumentale, Rue Provence, Rue de la Convention, Grenelle, Paris.’
Stencilled in black letters on the woodwork was ‘Return to’ in
French, English, and German, and the name of the same firm. Broughton
examined the label with care, in the half-unconscious hope of
discovering something from the handwriting. In this he was
disappointed, but, as he held the hand-lamp close, he saw something
else which interested him.

The label was divided into two parts, an ornamental border containing
the sender’s advertisement and a central portion for the address.
These two were separated by a thick black line. What had caught
Broughton’s eye was an unevenness along this line, and closer
examination showed that the central portion had been cut out, and a
piece of paper pasted on the back of the card to cover the hole.
Felix’s address was therefore written on this paper, and not on the
original label. The alteration had been neatly done, and was almost
unnoticeable. Broughton was puzzled at first, then it occurred to him
that the firm must have run out of labels and made an old one do duty
a second time.

‘A cask containing money and a human hand--probably a body,’ he
mused. ‘It’s a queer business and something has got to be done about
it.’ He stood looking at the cask while he thought out his course of
action.

That a serious crime had been committed he felt sure, and that it was
his duty to report his discovery immediately he was no less certain.
But there was the question of the consignment of wines. He had been
sent specially to the docks to check it, and he wondered if he would
be right to leave the work undone. He thought so. The matter was
serious enough to justify him. And it was not as if the wine would
not be checked. The ordinary tallyman was there, and Broughton knew
him to be careful and accurate. Besides, he could probably get a
clerk from the dock office to help. His mind was made up. He would go
straight to Fenchurch Street and report to Mr. Avery, the managing
director.

‘Harkness,’ he said, ‘I’m going up to the head office to report this.
You’d better close up that hole as best you can and then stay here
and watch the cask. Don’t let it out of your sight on any pretext
until you get instructions from Mr. Avery.’

‘Right, Mr. Broughton,’ replied the foreman, ‘I think you’re doing
the proper thing.’

They replaced as much of the sawdust as they could, and Harkness
fitted the broken piece of stave into the space and drove it home,
nailing it fast.

‘Well, I’m off,’ said Broughton, but as he turned to go a gentleman
stepped down into the hold and spoke to him. He was a man of medium
height, foreign-looking, with a dark complexion and a black pointed
beard, and dressed in a well-cut suit of blue clothes, with white
spats and a Homburg hat. He bowed and smiled.

‘Pardon me, but you are, I presume, an I. and C. official?’ he asked,
speaking perfect English, but with a foreign accent.

‘I am a clerk in the head office, sir,’ replied Broughton.

‘Ah, quite so. Perhaps then you can oblige me with some information?
I am expecting from Paris by this boat a cask containing a group of
statuary from Messrs. Dupierre of that city. Can you tell me if it
has arrived? This is my name.’ He handed Broughton a card on which
was printed: ‘M. Léon Felix, 141 West Jubb Street, Tottenham Court
Road, W.’

Though the clerk saw at a glance the name was the same as that on the
label on the cask, he pretended to read it with care while
considering his reply. This man clearly was the consignee, and if he
were told the cask was there he would doubtless claim immediate
possession. Broughton could think of no excuse for refusing him, but
he was determined all the same not to let it go. He had just decided
to reply that it had not yet come to light, but that they would keep
a look-out for it, when another point struck him.

The damaged cask had been moved to the side of the hold next the
dock, and it occurred to the clerk that any one standing on the wharf
beside the hatch could see it. For all he knew to the contrary, this
man Felix might have watched their whole proceedings, including the
making of the hole in the cask and the taking out of the sovereigns.
If he had recognised his property, as was possible, a couple of steps
from where he was standing would enable him to put his finger on the
label and so convict Broughton of a falsehood. The clerk decided that
in this case honesty would be the best policy.

‘Yes, sir,’ he answered, ‘your cask has arrived. By a curious
coincidence it is this one beside us. We had just separated it out
from the wine-barrels owing to its being differently consigned.’

Mr. Felix looked at the young man suspiciously, but he only said:
‘Thank you. I am a collector of _objets d’art_, and am anxious to see
the statue. I have a cart here and I presume I can get it away at
once?’

This was what Broughton had expected, but he thought he saw his way.

‘Well, sir,’ he responded civilly, ‘that is outside my job and I fear
I cannot help you. But I am sure you can get it now if you will come
over to the office on the quay and go through the usual formalities.
I am going there now and will be pleased to show you the way.’

‘Oh, thank you. Certainly,’ agreed the stranger.

As they walked off, a doubt arose in Broughton’s mind that Harkness
might misunderstand his replies to Felix, and if the latter returned
with a plausible story might let the cask go. He therefore called
out:--

‘You understand then, Harkness, you are to do nothing till you hear
from Mr. Avery,’ to which the foreman replied by a wave of the hand.

The problem the young clerk had to solve was threefold. First, he had
to go to Fenchurch Street to report the matter to his managing
director. Next, he must ensure that the cask was kept in the
Company’s possession until that gentleman had decided his course of
action, and lastly, he wished to accomplish both of these things
without raising the suspicions either of Felix or the clerks in the
quay office. It was not an easy matter, and at first Broughton was
somewhat at a loss. But as they entered the office a plan occurred to
him which he at once decided on. He turned to his companion.

‘If you will wait here a moment, sir,’ he said, ‘I’ll find the clerk
who deals with your business and send him to you.’

‘I thank you.’

He passed through the door in the screen dividing the outer and inner
offices and, crossing to the manager’s room, spoke in a low tone to
that official.

‘Mr. Huston, there’s a man outside named Felix for whom a cask has
come from Paris on the _Bullfinch_ and he wants possession now. The
cask is there, but Mr. Avery suspects there is something not quite
right about it, and he sent me to tell you to please delay delivery
until you hear further from him. He said to make any excuse, but
under no circumstances to give the thing up. He will ring you up in
an hour or so when he has made some further inquiries.’

Mr. Huston looked queerly at the young man, but he only said, ‘That
will be all right,’ and the latter took him out and introduced him to
Mr. Felix.

Broughton delayed a few moments in the inner office to arrange with
one of the clerks to take up his work on the _Bullfinch_ during his
absence. As he passed out by the counter at which the manager and Mr.
Felix were talking, he heard the latter say in an angry tone:--

‘Very well, I will go now and see your Mr. Avery, and I feel sure he
will make it up to me for this obstruction and annoyance.’

‘It’s up to me to be there first,’ thought Broughton, as he hurried
out of the dock gates in search of a taxi. None was in sight and he
stopped and considered the situation. If Felix had a car waiting he
would get to Fenchurch Street while he, Broughton, was looking round.
Something else must be done.

Stepping into the Little Tower Hill Post Office, he rang up the head
office, getting through to Mr. Avery’s private room. In a few words
he explained that he had accidentally come on evidence which pointed
to the commission of a serious crime, that a man named Felix appeared
to know something about it, and that this man was about to call on
Mr. Avery, continuing,--

‘Now, sir, if you’ll let me make a suggestion, it is that you don’t
see this Mr. Felix immediately he calls, but that you let me into
your private office by the landing door, so that I don’t need to pass
through the outer office. Then you can hear my story in detail and
decide what to do.’

‘It all sounds rather vague and mysterious,’ replied the distant
voice, ‘can you not tell me what you found?’

‘Not from here, sir, if you please. If you’ll trust me this time, I
think you’ll be satisfied that I am right when you hear my story.’

‘All right. Come along.’

Broughton left the post office and, now when it no longer mattered,
found an empty taxi. Jumping in, he drove to Fenchurch Street and,
passing up the staircase, knocked at his chief’s private door.

‘Well, Broughton,’ said Mr. Avery, ‘sit down there.’ Going to the
door leading to the outer office he spoke to Wilcox.

‘I’ve just had a telephone call and I want to send some other
messages. I’ll be engaged for half an hour.’ Then he closed the door
and slipped the bolt.

‘You see I have done as you asked and I shall now hear your story. I
trust you haven’t put me to all this inconvenience without a good
cause.’

‘I think not, sir, and I thank you for the way you have met me. What
happened was this,’ and Broughton related in detail his visit to the
docks, the mishap to the casks, the discovery of the sovereigns and
the woman’s hand, the coming of Mr. Felix and the interview in the
quay office, ending up by placing the twenty-one sovereigns in a
little pile on the chief’s desk.

When he ceased speaking there was silence for several minutes, while
Mr. Avery thought over what he had heard. The tale was a strange one,
but both from his knowledge of Broughton’s character as well as from
the young man’s manner he implicitly believed every word he had
heard. He considered the firm’s position in the matter. In one way it
did not concern them if a sealed casket, delivered to them for
conveyance, contained marble, gold, or road metal, so long as the
freight was paid. Their contract was to carry what was handed over to
them from one point to another and give it up in the condition they
received it. If any one chose to send sovereigns under the guise of
statuary, any objection that might be raised concerned the Customs
Department, not them.

On the other hand, if evidence pointing to a serious crime came to
the firm’s notice, it would be the duty of the firm to acquaint the
police. The woman’s hand in the cask might or might not indicate a
murder, but the suspicion was too strong to justify them in hiding
the matter. He came to a decision.

‘Broughton,’ he said, ‘I think you have acted very wisely all
through. We will go now to Scotland Yard, and you may repeat your
tale to the authorities. After that I think we will be clear of it.
Will you go out the way you came in, get a taxi, and wait for me in
Fenchurch Street at the end of Mark Lane.’

Mr. Avery locked the private door after the young man, put on his
coat and hat, and went into the outer office.

‘I am going out for a couple of hours, Wilcox,’ he said.

The head clerk approached with a letter in his hand.

‘Very good, sir. A gentleman named Mr. Felix called about 11.30 to
see you. When I said you were engaged, he would not wait, but asked
for a sheet of paper and an envelope to write you a note. This is it.’

The managing director took the note and turned back into his private
office to read it. He was puzzled. He had said at 11.15 he would be
engaged for half an hour. Therefore, Mr. Felix would only have had
fifteen minutes to wait. As he opened the envelope he wondered why
that gentleman could not have spared this moderate time, after coming
all the way from the docks to see him. And then he was puzzled again,
for the envelope was empty!

He stood in thought. Had something occurred to startle Mr. Felix when
writing his note, so that in his agitation he omitted to enclose it?
Or had he simply made a mistake? Or was there some deep-laid plot?
Well, he would see what Scotland Yard thought.

He put the envelope away in his pocket-book and, going down to the
street, joined Broughton in the taxi. They rattled along the crowded
thoroughfares while Mr. Avery told the clerk about the envelope.

‘I say, sir,’ said the latter, ‘but that’s a strange business. When I
saw him, Mr. Felix was not at all agitated. He seemed to me a very
cool, clear-headed man.’

It happened that about a year previously the shipping company had
been the victim of a series of cleverly planned robberies, and, in
following up the matter, Mr. Avery had become rather well acquainted
with two or three of the Yard Inspectors. One of these in particular
he had found a shrewd and capable officer, as well as a kindly and
pleasant man to work with. On arrival at the Yard he therefore asked
for this man, and was pleased to find he was not engaged.

‘Good morning, Mr. Avery,’ said the Inspector, as they entered his
office, ‘what good wind blows you our way to-day?’

‘Good morning, Inspector. This is Mr. Broughton, one of my clerks,
and he has got a rather singular story that I think will interest you
to hear.’

Inspector Burnley shook hands, closed the door, and drew up a couple
of chairs.

‘Sit down, gentlemen,’ he said. ‘I am always interested in a good
story.’

‘Now, Broughton, repeat your adventures over again to Inspector
Burnley.’

Broughton started off and, for the second time, told of his visit to
the docks, the damage to the heavily built cask, the finding of the
sovereigns and the woman’s hand, and the interview with Mr. Felix.
The Inspector listened gravely and took a note or two, but did not
speak till the clerk had finished, when he said:--

‘Let me congratulate you, Mr. Broughton, on your very clear
statement.’

‘To which I might add a word,’ said Mr. Avery, and he told of the
visit of Mr. Felix to the office and handed over the envelope he had
left.

‘That envelope was written at 11.30,’ said the Inspector, ‘and it is
now nearly 12.30. I am afraid this is a serious matter, Mr. Avery.
Can you come to the docks at once?’

‘Certainly.’

‘Well, don’t let us lose any time.’ He threw a London directory down
before Broughton. ‘Just look up this Felix, will you, while I make
some arrangements.’

Broughton looked for West Jubb Street, but there was no such near
Tottenham Court Road.

‘I thought as much,’ said Inspector Burnley, who had been
telephoning. ‘Let us proceed.’

As they reached the courtyard a taxi drew up, containing two plain
clothes men as well as the driver. Burnley threw open the door, they
all got in, and the vehicle slid quickly out into the street.

Burnley turned to Broughton. ‘Describe the man Felix as minutely as
you can.’

‘He was a man of about middle height, rather slightly and elegantly
built. He was foreign-looking, French, I should say, or even Spanish,
with dark eyes and complexion, and black hair. He wore a short,
pointed beard. He was dressed in blue clothes of good quality, with a
dark-green or brown Homburg hat, and black shoes with light spats. I
did not observe his collar and tie specially, but he gave me the
impression of being well-dressed in such matters of detail. He wore a
ring with some kind of stone on the little finger of his left hand.’

The two plain clothes men had listened attentively to the
description, and they and the Inspector conversed in low tones for a
few moments, when silence fell on the party.

They stopped opposite the _Bullfinch’s_ berth and Broughton led the
way down.

‘There she is,’ he pointed, ‘if we go to that gangway we can get down
direct to the forehold.’

The two plain-clothes men had also alighted and the five walked in
the direction indicated. They crossed the gangway and, approaching
the hatchway, looked down into the hold.

‘There’s where it is,’ began Broughton, pointing down, and then
suddenly stopped.

The others stepped forward and looked down. The hold was empty.
Harkness and the cask were gone!




CHAPTER II

INSPECTOR BURNLEY ON THE TRACK

The immediate suggestion was, of course, that Harkness had had the
cask moved to some other place for safety, and this they set
themselves to find out.

‘Get hold of the gang that were unloading this hold,’ said the
Inspector.

Broughton darted off and brought up a stevedore’s foreman, from whom
they learned that the forehold had been emptied some ten minutes
earlier, the men having waited to complete it and then gone for
dinner.

‘Where do they get their dinner? Can we get hold of them now?’ asked
Mr. Avery.

‘Some of them, sir, I think. Most of them go out into the city, but
some use the night watchman’s room where there is a fire.’

‘Let’s go and see,’ said the Inspector, and headed by the foreman
they walked some hundred yards along the quay to a small brick
building set apart from the warehouses, inside and in front of which
sat a number of men, some eating from steaming cans, others smoking
short pipes.

‘Any o’ you boys on the _Bullfinch’s_ lower forehold?’ asked the
foreman, ‘if so, boss wants you ’alf a sec.’

Three of the men got up slowly and came forward.

‘We want to know, men,’ said the managing director, ‘if you can tell
us anything about Harkness and a damaged cask. He was to wait with it
till we got down.’

‘Well, he’s gone with it,’ said one of the men, ‘lessn’ ’alf an hour
ago.’

‘Gone with it?’

‘Yes. Some toff in blue clothes an’ a black beard came up an’ give
’im a paper, an’ when ’e’d read it ’e calls out an’ sez, sez ’e,
‘’Elp me swing out this ’ere cask,’ ’e says. We ’elps ’im, an’ ’e
puts it on a ’orse dray--a four-wheeler. An’ then they all goes off,
’im an’ the cove in the blue togs walkin’ together after the dray.’

‘Any name on the dray?’ asked Mr. Avery.

‘There was,’ replied the spokesman, ‘but I’m blessed if I knows what
it was. ’Ere Bill, you was talking about that there name. Where was
it?’

Another man spoke.

‘It was Tottenham Court Road, it was. But I didn’t know the street,
and I thought that a strange thing, for I’ve lived off the Tottenham
Court Road all my life.’

‘Was it East John Street?’ asked Inspector Burnley.

‘Ay, it was something like that. East or West. West, I think. An’ it
was something like John. Not John, but something like it.’

‘What colour was the dray?’

‘Blue, very fresh and clean.’

‘Any one notice the colour of the horse?’

But this was beyond them. The horse was out of their line. Its colour
had not been observed.

‘Well,’ said Mr. Avery, as the Inspector signed that was all he
wanted, ‘we are much obliged to you. Here’s something for you.’

Inspector Burnley beckoned to Broughton.

‘You might describe this man Harkness.’

‘He was a tall chap with a sandy moustache, very high cheek-bones,
and a big jaw. He was dressed in brown dungarees and a cloth cap.’

‘You hear that,’ said the Inspector, turning to the plain-clothes
men. ‘They have half an hour’s start. Try to get on their track. Try
north and east first, as it is unlikely they’d go west for fear of
meeting us. Report to headquarters.’

The men hurried away.

‘Now, a telephone,’ continued the Inspector. ‘Perhaps you’d let me
use your quay office one.’

They walked to the office, and Mr. Avery arranged for him to get the
private instrument in the manager’s room. He rejoined the others in a
few minutes.

‘Well,’ he said, ‘that’s all we can do in the meantime. A description
of the men and cart will be wired round to all the stations
immediately, and every constable in London will be on the look-out
for them before very much longer.’

‘Very good that,’ said the managing director.

The Inspector looked surprised.

‘Oh no,’ he said, ‘that’s the merest routine. But now I’m here I
would like to make some other inquiries. Perhaps you would tell your
people that I’m acting with your approval, as it might make them give
their information more willingly.’

Mr. Avery called over Huston, the manager.

‘Huston, this is Inspector Burnley of Scotland Yard. He is making
some inquiries about that cask you already heard of. I’ll be glad if
you see that he is given every facility.’ He turned to the Inspector.
‘I suppose there’s nothing further I can do to help you? I should be
glad to get back to the City again, if possible.’

‘Thank you, Mr. Avery, there’s nothing more. I’ll cruise round here a
bit. I’ll let you know how things develop.’

‘Right. Good-bye then, in the meantime.’

The Inspector, left to his own devices, called Broughton and, going
on board the _Bullfinch_, had the clerk’s story repeated in great
detail, the actual place where each incident happened being pointed
out. He made a search for any object that might have been dropped,
but without success, visited the wharf and other points from which
the work at the cask might have been overlooked, and generally made
himself thoroughly familiar with the circumstances. By the time this
was done the other men who had been unloading the forehold had
returned from dinner, and he interviewed them, questioning each
individually. No additional information was received.

The Inspector then returned to the quay office.

‘I want you,’ he asked Mr. Huston, ‘to be so good as to show me all
the papers you have referring to that cask, waybills, forward notes,
everything.’

Mr. Huston disappeared, returning in a few seconds with some papers
which he handed to Burnley. The latter examined them and then said:--

‘These seem to show that the cask was handed over to the French State
Railway at their Rue Cardinet Goods Station, near the Gare St.
Lazare, in Paris, by MM. Dupierre et Cie., carriage being paid
forward. They ran it by rail to Rouen, where it was loaded on to your
_Bullfinch_.’

‘That is so.’

‘I suppose you cannot say whether the Paris collection was made by a
railway vehicle?’

‘No, but I should think not, as otherwise the cartage charges would
probably show.’

‘I think I am right in saying that these papers are complete and
correct in every detail?’

‘Oh yes, they are perfectly in order.’

‘How do you account for the cask being passed through by the Customs
officials without examination?’

‘There was nothing suspicious about it. It bore the label of a
well-known and reputable firm, and was invoiced as well as
stencilled, ‘Statuary only.’ It was a receptacle obviously suitable
for transporting such goods, and its weight was also in accordance.
Unless in the event of some suspicious circumstance, cases of this
kind are seldom opened.’

‘Thank you, Mr. Huston, that is all I want at present. Now, can I see
the captain of the _Bullfinch_?’

‘Certainly. Come over and I’ll introduce you.’

Captain M’Nabb was a big, rawboned Ulsterman, with a hooked nose and
sandy hair. He was engaged in writing up some notes in his cabin.

‘Come in, sir, come in,’ he said, as Huston made the Inspector known.
‘What can I do for you?’

Burnley explained his business. He had only a couple of questions to
ask.

‘How is the trans-shipment done from the railway to your boat at
Rouen?’

‘The wagons come down on the wharf right alongside. The Rouen
stevedores load them, either with the harbour travelling crane or our
own winches.’

‘Would it be at all possible for a barrel to be tampered with after
it was once aboard?’

‘How do you mean tampered with? A barrel of wine might be tapped, but
that’s all could be done.’

‘Could a barrel be changed, or completely emptied and filled with
something else?’

‘It could not. The thing’s altogether impossible.’

‘I’m much obliged to you, captain. Good-day.’

Inspector Burnley was nothing if not thorough. He questioned in turn
the winch drivers, the engineers, even the cook, and before six
o’clock had interviewed every man that had sailed on the _Bullfinch_
from Rouen. The results were unfortunately entirely negative. No
information about the cask was forthcoming. No question had been
raised about it. Nothing had happened to call attention to it, or
that was in any way out of the common.

Puzzled but not disheartened, Inspector Burnley drove back to
Scotland Yard, his mind full of the mysterious happenings, and his
pocket-book stored with all kinds of facts about the _Bullfinch_, her
cargo, and crew.

Two messages were waiting for him. The first was from Ralston, the
plain-clothes man that he had sent from the docks in a northerly
direction. It read:--

‘Traced parties as far as north end of Leman Street. Trail lost
there.’

The second was from a police station in Upper Head Street:--

‘Parties seen turning from Great Eastern Street into Curtain Road
about 1.20 p.m.’

‘H’m, going north-west, are they?’ mused the Inspector taking down a
large scale map of the district. ‘Let’s see. Here’s Leman Street.
That is, say, due north from St. Katherine’s Docks, and half a mile
or more away. Now, what’s the other one?’--he referred to the
wire--‘Curtain Road should be somewhere here. Yes, here it is. Just a
continuation of the same line, only more west, say, a mile and a half
from the docks. So they’re going straight, are they, and using the
main streets. H’m. H’m. Now I wonder where they’re heading to. Let’s
see.’

The Inspector pondered. ‘Ah, well,’ he murmured at last, ‘we must
wait till to-morrow,’ and, sending instructions recalling his two
plain-clothes assistants, he went home.

But his day’s work was not done. Hardly had he finished his meal and
lit one of the strong, black cigars he favoured, when he was summoned
back to Scotland Yard. There waiting for him was Broughton, and with
him the tall, heavy-jawed foreman, Harkness.

The Inspector pulled forward two chairs.

‘Sit down, gentlemen,’ he said, when the clerk had introduced his
companion, ‘and let me hear your story.’

‘You’ll be surprised to see me so soon again, Mr. Burnley,’ answered
Broughton, ‘but, after leaving you, I went back to the office to see
if there were any instructions for me, and found our friend here had
just turned up. He was asking for the chief, Mr. Avery, but he had
gone home. Then he told me his adventures, and as I felt sure Mr.
Avery would have sent him to you, I thought my best plan was to bring
him along without delay.’

‘And right you were, Mr. Broughton. Now, Mr. Harkness, I would be
obliged if you would tell me what happened to you.’

The foreman settled himself comfortably in his chair.

‘Well, sir,’ he began, ‘I think you’re listening to the biggest fool
between this and St. Paul’s. I ’ave been done this afternoon, fairly
diddled, an’ not once only, but two separate times. ’Owever, I’d
better tell you from the beginning.

‘When Mr. Broughton an’ Felix left, I stayed an’ kept an eye on the
cask. I got some bits of ’oop iron by way o’ mending it, so that none
o’ the boys would wonder why I was ’anging around. I waited the best
part of an hour, an’ then Felix came back.

‘“Mr. ’Arkness, I believe?” ’e said.

‘“That’s my name, sir,” I answered.

‘“I ’ave a letter for you from Mr. Avery. P’raps you would kindly
read it now,” ’e said.

‘It was a note from the ’ead office, signed by Mr. Avery, an’ it said
that ’e ’ad seen Mr. Broughton an’ that it was all right about the
cask, an’ for me to give it up to Felix at once. It said too that we
’ad to deliver the cask at the address that was on it, an’ for me to
go there along with it and Felix, an’ to report if it was safely
delivered.

‘“That’s all right, sir,” said I, an’ I called to some o’ the boys,
an’ we got the cask swung ashore an’ on to a four-wheeled dray Felix
’ad waiting. ’E ’ad two men with it, a big, strong fellow with red
’air an’ a smaller dark chap that drove. We turned east at the dock
gates, an’ then went up Leman Street an’ on into a part o’ the city I
didn’t know.

‘When we ’ad gone a mile or more, the red-’aired man said ’e could do
with a drink. Felix wanted ’im to carry on at first, but ’e gave in
after a bit an’ we stopped in front o’ a bar. The small man’s name
was Watty, an’ Felix asked ’im could ’e leave the ’orse, but Watty,
said “No,” an’ then Felix told ’im to mind it while the rest of us
went in, an’ ’e would come out soon an’ look after it, so’s Watty
could go in ’an get ’is drink. So Felix an’ I an’ Ginger went in, an’
Felix ordered four bottles o’ beer an’ paid for them. Felix drank ’is
off, an’ then ’e told us to wait till ’e would send Watty in for ’is,
an’ went out. As soon as ’e ’ad gone Ginger leant over an’ whispered
to me, “Say, mate, wot’s ’is game with the blooming cask? I lay you
five to one ’e ’as something crooked on.”

‘“Why,” said I, “I don’t know about that.” You see, sir, I ’ad
thought the same myself, but then Mr. Avery wouldn’t ’ave written wot
it was all right if it wasn’t.

‘“Well, see ’ere,” said Ginger, “maybe if you an’ I was to keep our
eyes skinned, it might put a few quid in our pockets.”

‘“’Ow’s that?” said I.

‘“’Ow’s it yourself?” said ’e. “If ’e ’as some game on wi’ the cask
’e’ll not be wanting for to let any outsiders in. If you an’ me was
to offer for to let them in for ’im, ’e’d maybe think we was worth
something.”

‘Well, gentlemen, I thought over that, an’ first I wondered if this
chap knew there was a body in the cask, an’ I was going to see if I
couldn’t find out without giving myself away. Then I thought maybe ’e
was on the same lay, an’ was pumping me. So I thought I would pass it
off a while, an’ I said:--

‘“Would Watty come in?”

‘Ginger said “No,” that three was too many for a job o’ that kind,
an’ we talked on a while. Then I ’appened to look at Watty’s beer
standing there, an’ I wondered ’e ’hadn’t been in for it.

‘“That beer won’t keep,” I said. “If that blighter wants it ’e’d
better come an’ get it.”

‘Ginger sat up when ’e ’eard that.

‘“Wots wrong with ’im?” ’e said. “I’ll drop out an’ see.”

‘I don’t know why, gentlemen, but I got a kind o’ notion there was
something in the air, an’ I followed ’im out. The dray was gone. We
looked up an’ down the street, but there wasn’t a sign of it nor
Felix nor Watty.

‘“Blow me, if they ’aven’t given us the slip,” shouted Ginger. “Get a
move on. You go that way an’ I’ll go this, an’ one of us is bound to
see them at the corner.”

‘I guessed I was on to the game then. These three were wrong ’uns,
an’ they were out to get rid o’ the body, an’ they didn’t want me
around to see the grave. All that about the drinks was a plan to get
me away from the dray, an’ Ginger’s talk was only to keep me quiet
till the others got clear. Well, two o’ them ’ad got quit o’ me right
enough, but I was blessed if the third would.

‘“No, you don’t, ol’ pal,” I said. “I guess you an’ me’ll stay
together.” I took ’is arm an’ ’urried ’im on the way ’e ’ad wanted to
go ’imself. But when we got to the corner there wasn’t sign o’ the
dray. They ’ad given us the slip about proper.

‘Ginger cursed an’ raved, an’ wanted to know ’oo was going to pay ’im
for ’is day. I tried to get out of ’im ’oo ’e was an’ ’oo ’ad ’ired
’im, but ’e wasn’t giving anything away. I kept close beside ’im, for
I knew ’e’d ’ave to go ’ome some time, an’ I thought if I saw where
’e lived it would be easy to find out where ’e worked, an’ so likely
get ’old o’ Felix. ’E tried different times to juke away from me, an’
’e got real mad when ’e found ’e couldn’t.

‘We walked about for more than three hours till it was near five
o’clock, an’ then we ’ad some more beer, an’ when we came out o’ the
bar we stood at the corner o’ two streets an’ thought wot we’d do
next. An’ then suddenly Ginger lurched up against me, an’ I drove
fair into an old woman that was passing, an’ nearly knocked ’er over.
I caught ’er to keep ’er from falling--I couldn’t do no less--but
when I looked round, I’m blessed if Ginger wasn’t gone. I ran down
one street first, an’ then down the other, an’ then I went back into
the bar, but never a sight of ’im did I get. I cursed myself for
every kind of a fool, an’ then I thought I’d better go back an’ tell
Mr. Avery anyway. So I went to Fenchurch Street, an’ Mr. Broughton
brought me along ’ere.’

There was silence when the foreman ceased speaking, while Inspector
Burnley, in his painstaking way, considered the statement he had
heard, as well as that made by Broughton earlier in the day. He
reviewed the chain of events in detail, endeavouring to separate out
the undoubted facts from what might be only the narrator’s opinions.
If the two men were to be believed, and Burnley had no reason for
doubting either, the facts about the discovery and removal of the
cask were clear, with one exception. There seemed to be no adequate
proof that the cask really did contain a corpse.

‘Mr. Broughton tells me he thought there was a body in the cask. Do
you agree with that, Mr. Harkness?’

‘Yes, sir, there’s no doubt of it. We both saw a woman’s hand.’

‘But might it not have been a statue? The cask was labelled
‘Statuary,’ I understand.’

‘No, sir, it wasn’t no statue. Mr. Broughton thought that at first,
but when ’e looked at it again ’e gave in I was right. It was a body,
sure enough.’

Further questions showed that both men were convinced the hand was
real, though neither could advance any grounds for their belief other
than that he ‘knew from the look of it.’ The Inspector was not
satisfied that their opinion was correct, though he thought it
probable. He also noted the possibility of the cask containing a hand
only or perhaps an arm, and it passed through his mind that such a
thing might be backed by a medical student as a somewhat gruesome
practical joke. Then he turned to Harkness again.

‘Have you the letter Felix gave you on the _Bullfinch_?’

‘Yes, sir,’ replied the foreman, handing it over.

It was written in what looked like a junior clerk’s handwriting on a
small-sized sheet of business letter paper. It bore the I. and C.’s
ordinary printed heading, and read:--


                                                ‘_5th April, 1912_.

‘MR. HARKNESS,

   on s.s. _Bullfinch_,

      St. Katherine’s Docks.

‘Re Mr. Broughton’s conversation with you about cask for Mr. Felix.

‘I have seen Mr. Broughton and Mr. Felix on this matter, and am
satisfied the cask is for Mr. Felix and should be delivered
immediately.

‘On receipt of this letter please hand it over to Mr. Felix without
further delay.

‘As the Company is liable for its delivery at the address it bears,
please accompany it as the representative of the Company, and report
to me of its safe arrival in due course.

      ‘For the I. and C. S. N. Co., Ltd.,

                ‘X. Avery,

                     ‘per X. X.,

                            ‘Managing Director.’


The initials shown ‘X’ were undecipherable and were apparently
written by a person in authority, though curiously the word ‘Avery’
in the same hand was quite clear.

‘It’s written on your Company’s paper anyway,’ said the Inspector to
Broughton. ‘I suppose that heading is yours and not a fake?’

‘It’s ours right enough,’ returned the clerk, ‘but I’m certain the
letter’s a forgery for all that.’

‘I should imagine so, but just how do you know?’

‘For several reasons, sir. Firstly, we do not use that quality of
paper for writing our own servants; we have a cheaper form of
memorandum for that. Secondly, all our stuff is typewritten; and
thirdly, that is not the signature of any of our clerks.’

‘Pretty conclusive. It is evident that the forger did not know either
your managing director’s or your clerks’ initials. His knowledge was
confined to the name Avery, and from your statement we can conceive
Felix having just that amount of information.’

‘But how on earth did he get our paper?’

Burnley smiled.

‘Oh, well, that’s not so difficult. Didn’t your head clerk give it to
him?’

‘By Jove! sir, I see it now. He got a sheet of paper and an envelope
to write to Mr. Avery. He left the envelope and vanished with the
sheet.’

‘Of course. It occurred to me when Mr. Avery told me of the empty
envelope. I guessed what he was going to do, and therefore I hurried
to the docks in the hope of being before him. And now about that
label on the cask. You might describe it again as fully as you can.’

‘It was a card about six inches long by four high, fastened on by
tacks all round the edge. Along the top was Dupierre’s name and
advertisement, and in the bottom right-hand corner was a space about
three inches by two for the address. There was a thick, black line
round this space, and the card had been cut along this line so as to
remove the enclosed portion and leave a hole three inches by two. The
hole had been filled by pasting a sheet of paper or card behind the
label. Felix’s address was therefore written on this paper, and not
on the original card.’

‘A curious arrangement. How do you explain it?’

‘I thought perhaps Dupierre’s people had temporarily run out of
labels and were making an old one do again.’

Burnley replied absently, as he turned the matter over in his mind.
The clerk’s suggestion was of course possible, in fact, if the cask
really contained a statue, it was the likely one. On the other hand,
if it held a body, he imagined the reason was further to seek. In
this case he thought it improbable that the cask had come from
Dupierre’s at all and, if not, what had happened? A possible
explanation occurred to him. Suppose some unknown person had received
a statue from Dupierre’s in the cask and, before returning the
latter, had committed a murder. Suppose he wanted to get rid of the
body by sending it somewhere in the cask. What would he do with the
label? Why, what had been done. He would wish to retain Dupierre’s
printed matter in order to facilitate the passage of the cask through
the Customs, but he would have to change the written address. The
Inspector could think of no better way of doing this than by the
alteration that had been made. He turned again to his visitors. ‘Well
gentlemen, I’m greatly obliged to you for your prompt call and
information, and if you will give me your addresses, I think that is
all we can do to-night.’

Inspector Burnley again made his way home. But it was not his lucky
night. About half-past nine he was again sent for from the Yard. Some
one wanted to speak to him urgently on the telephone.




CHAPTER III

THE WATCHER ON THE WALL

At the same time that Inspector Burnley was interviewing Broughton
and Harkness in his office, another series of events centring round
the cask was in progress in a different part of London.

Police Constable Z76, John Walker in private life, was a newly-joined
member of the force. A young man of ideas and of promise, he took
himself and his work seriously. He had ambitions, the chief of which
was to become a detective officer, and he dreamed of the day when he
would have climbed to the giddy eminence of an Inspector of the Yard.
He had read Conan Doyle, Austin Freeman, and other masters of
detective fiction, and their tales had stimulated his imagination.
His efforts to emulate their heroes added to the interest of life
and, if they did not do him very much good, at least did him no harm.

About half-past six that evening, Constable Walker, attired in plain
clothes, was strolling slowly along the Holloway Road. He had come
off duty shortly before, had had his tea, and was now killing time
until he could go to see the second instalment of that thrilling
drama, ‘Lured by Love,’ at the Islington Picture House. Though on
pleasure bent, as he walked he kept on practising observation and
deduction. He had made a habit of noting the appearance of the people
he saw and trying to deduce their histories and, if he did not
succeed in this so well as Sherlock Holmes, he hoped he would some
day.

He looked at the people on the pathway beside him, but none of them
seemed a good subject for study. But as his gaze swept over the
vehicles in the roadway it fell on one which held his attention.

Coming along the street to meet him was a four-wheeled dray drawn by
a light brown horse. On the dray, upended, was a large cask. Two men
sat in front. One, a thin-faced, wiry fellow was driving. The other a
rather small-sized man, was leaning as if wearied out against the
cask. This man had a black beard.

Constable Walker’s heart beat fast. He had always made it a point to
memorise thoroughly the descriptions of wanted men, and only that
afternoon he had seen a wire from Headquarters containing the
description of just such an equipage. It was wanted, and wanted
badly. Had _he_ found it? Constable Walker’s excitement grew as he
wondered.

Unostentatiously he turned and strolled in the direction in which the
dray was going, while he laboured to recall in its every detail the
description he had read. A four-wheeled dray--that was right; a
single horse--right also. A heavily made, iron-clamped cask with one
stave broken at the end and roughly repaired by nailing. He glanced
at the vehicle which had now drawn level with him. Yes, the cask was
well and heavily made and iron clamped, but whether it had a broken
stave he could not tell. The dray was painted a brilliant blue and
had a Tottenham Court Road address. Here Constable Walker had a blow.
This dray was a muddy brown colour and bore the name, John Lyons and
Son, 127 Maddox Street, Lower Beechwood Road. He suffered a keen
disappointment. He had been getting so sure, and yet---- It certainly
looked very like what was wanted except for the colour.

Constable Walker took another look at the reddish-brown paint.
Curiously patchy it looked. Some parts were fresh and more or less
glossy, others dull and drab. And then his excitement rose again to
fever heat. He knew what that meant.

As a boy he had had the run of the small painting establishment in
the village in which he had been brought up, and he had learnt a
thing or two about paint. He knew that if you want paint to dry very
quickly you flat it--you use turpentine or some other flatting
instead of oil. Paint so made will dry in an hour, but it will have a
dull, flat surface instead of a glossy one. But if you paint over
with flat colour a surface recently painted in oil it will not dry so
quickly, and when it does it dries in patches, the dry parts being
dull, the wetter ones glossy. It was clear to Constable Walker that
the dray had been recently painted with flat brown, and that it was
only partly dry.

A thought struck him and he looked keenly at the mottled side. Yes,
he was not mistaken. He could see dimly under the flat coat, faint
traces of white lettering showing out lighter than the old blue
ground. And then his heart leaped for he was sure! There was no
possible chance of error!

He let the vehicle draw ahead, keeping his eye carefully on it while
he thought of his great luck. And then he recollected that there
should have been four men with it. There was a tall man with a sandy
moustache, prominent cheekbones, and a strong chin; a small, lightly
made, foreign-looking man with a black beard and two others whose
descriptions had not been given. The man with the beard was on the
dray, but the tall, red-haired man was not to be seen. Presumably the
driver was one of the undescribed men.

It occurred to Constable Walker that perhaps the other two were
walking. He therefore let the vehicle draw still farther ahead, and
devoted himself to a careful examination of all the male
foot-passengers going in the same direction. He crossed and recrossed
the road. But nowhere could he see any one answering to the
red-haired man’s description.

The quarry led steadily on in a northwesterly direction, Constable
Walker following at a considerable distance behind. At the end of the
Holloway Road it passed through Highgate, and continued out along the
Great North Road. By this time it was growing dusk, and the constable
drew slightly closer so as not to miss it if it made a sudden turn.

For nearly four miles the chase continued. It was now nearly eight,
and Constable Walker reflected with a transient feeling of regret
that ‘Lured by Love’ would then be in full swing. All immediate
indications of the city had been left behind. The country was now
suburban, the road being lined by detached and semidetached villas,
with an occasional field bearing a ‘Building Ground to Let’ notice.
The night was warm and very quiet. There was still light in the west,
but an occasional star was appearing eastwards. Soon it would be
quite dark.

Suddenly the dray stopped and a man got down and opened the gate of a
drive on the right-hand side of the road. The constable melted into
the hedge some fifty yards behind and remained motionless. Soon he
heard the dray move off again and the hard, rattling noise of the
road gave place to the softer, slightly grating sound of gravel. As
the constable crept up along the hedge he could see the light of the
dray moving towards the right.

A narrow lane branched off in the same direction immediately before
reaching the property into which the dray had gone. The drive, in
fact, was only some thirty feet beyond the lane and, so far as the
constable could see, both lane and drive turned at right angles to
the road and ran parallel, one outside and the other inside the
property. The constable slipped down the lane, thus leaving the thick
boundary hedge between himself and the others.

It was nearly though not quite dark, and the constable could make out
the rather low outline of the house, showing black against the sky.
The door was in the end gable facing the lane and was open, though
the house was entirely in darkness. Behind the house, from the end of
the gable and parallel to the lane, ran a wall about eight feet high,
evidently the yard wall, in which was a gate. The drive passed the
hall door and gable and led up to this gate. The buildings were close
to the lane, not more than forty feet from where the constable
crouched. Immediately inside the hedge was a row of small trees.

Standing in front of the yard gate was the dray, with one man at the
horse’s head. As the constable crept closer he heard sounds of
unbarring, and the gate swung open. In silence the man outside led
the dray within and the gate swung to.

The spirit of adventure had risen high in Constable Walker, and he
felt impelled to get still closer to see what was going on.

Opposite the hall door he had noticed a little gate in the hedge, and
he retraced his steps to this and with infinite care opened it and
passed silently through. Keeping well in the shadow of the hedge and
under the trees, he crept down again opposite the yard door and
reconnoitred.

Beyond the gate, that is on the side away from the house, the yard
wall ran on for some fifty feet, at the end of which a cross hedge
ran between it and the one under which he was standing. The constable
moved warily along to this cross hedge, which he followed until he
stood beside the wall.

In the corner between the hedge and the wall, unobserved till he
reached it in the growing darkness, stood a small, openwork, rustic
summer-house. As the constable looked at it an idea occurred to him.

With the utmost care he began to climb the side of the summer-house,
testing every foothold before trusting his weight on it. Slowly he
worked his way up until, cautiously raising his head, he was able to
peep over the wall.

The yard was of fair length, stretching from where he crouched to the
house, a distance of seventy or eighty feet, but was not more than
about thirty feet wide. Along the opposite side it was bounded by a
row of out-offices. The large double doors of one of these,
apparently a coach-house, were open, and a light shone out from the
interior. In front of the doorway and with its back to it stood the
dray.

The coach-house being near the far end of the yard, Constable Walker
was unable to see what was taking place within. He therefore raised
himself upon the wall and slowly and silently crawled along the
coping in the direction of the house. He was aware his strategic
position was bad, but he reflected that, being on the southeast side
of the yard, he had dark sky behind him, while the row of trees would
still further blacken his background. He felt safe from observation,
and continued till he was nearly opposite the coach-house. Then he
stretched himself flat on the coping, hid his face, which he feared
might show white if the lantern shone on it, behind the dark sleeve
of his reddish brown coat, and waited.

He could now see into the coach-house. It was an empty room of fair
size with whitewashed walls and a cement floor. On a peg in the wall
hung a hurricane lamp, and by its light he saw the bearded man
descending a pair of steps which was placed in the centre of the
floor. The wiry man stood close by.

‘That hook’s all right,’ said the bearded man, ‘I have it over the
tie beam. Now for the differential.’

He disappeared into an adjoining room, returning in a moment with a
small set of chain blocks. Taking the end of this up the steps, he
made it fast to something above. The steps were then removed, and
Constable Walker could just see below the lintel of the door, the
hook of the block with a thin chain sling hanging over it.

‘Now back in,’ said the bearded man.

The dray was backed in until the cask stood beneath the blocks. Both
men with some apparent difficulty got the sling fixed, and then
pulling on the chain loop, slowly raised the cask.

‘That’ll do,’ said the bearded man when it was some six inches up.
‘Draw out now.’

The wiry man came to the horse’s head and brought the dray out of the
building, stopping in front of the yard gate. Taking the lantern from
its hook and leaving the cask swinging in mid-air, the bearded man
followed. He closed the coach-house doors and secured them with a
running bolt and padlock, then crossed to the yard gates and began
unfastening them. Both men were now within fifteen feet of Constable
Walker, and he lay scarcely daring to breathe.

The wiry man spoke for the first time.

‘’Arf a mo,’ mister,’ he said, ‘what abaht that there money?’

‘Well,’ said the other, ‘I’ll give you yours now, and the other
fellow can have his any time he comes for it.’

‘I don’t think,’ the wiry man replied aggressively. ‘I’ll take my
pal’s now along o’ my own. When would ’e ’ave time to come around
’ere looking for it?’

‘If I give it to you, what guarantee have I that he won’t deny
getting it and come and ask for more?’

‘You’ll ’ave no guarantee at all abaht it, only that I just tells
yer. Come on, mister, ’and it over an’ let me get away. And don’t yer
go for to think two quid’s goin’ for to settle it up. This ain’t the
job wot we expected when we was ’ired, this ain’t. If you want us for
to carry your little game through on the strict q.t., why, you’ll
’ave to pay for it, that’s wot.’

‘Confound your impertinence! What the devil do you mean?’

The other leered.

‘There ain’t no cause for you to swear at a poor workin’ man. Come
now, mister, you an’ me understands each other well enough. You don’t
want no questions asked. Ten quid apiece an’ me an’ my pal we don’t
know nothin’ abaht it.’

‘My good man, you’ve gone out of your senses. I have nothing to keep
quiet. This business is quite correct.’

The wiry man winked deliberately.

‘That’s orl right, mister, it’s quite c’rrect. And ten quid apiece’ll
keep it that way?’

There was silence for a moment, and the bearded man spoke:--

‘You suspect there is something wrong about the cask? Well, you’re
wrong, for there isn’t. But I admit that if you talk before Thursday
next I’ll lose my bet. See here, I’ll give you five pounds apiece and
you may have your mate’s.’ He counted out some coins, chinking them
in his hands. ‘You may take it or leave it. You won’t get any more,
for then it would be cheaper for me to lose the bet.’

The wiry man paused, eyeing the gold greedily. He opened his mouth to
reply, then a sudden thought seemed to strike him. Irresolutely he
stood, glancing questioningly at the other. Constable Walker could
see his face clearly in the light of the lantern, with an evil,
sardonic smile curling his lips. Then, like a man who, after weighing
a problem, comes to a decision, he took the money and turned to the
horse’s head.

‘Well, mister,’ he said, as he put his vehicle in motion, ‘that’s
straight enough. I’ll stand by it.’

The bearded man closed and bolted the yard gates and disappeared with
his lantern into the house. In a few seconds the sounds of the
receding wheels on the gravel ceased and everything was still.

After waiting a few minutes motionless, Constable Walker slipped off
the coping of the wall and dropped noiselessly to the ground.
Tiptoeing across to the hedge, he passed silently out of the little
gate and regained the lane.




CHAPTER IV

A MIDNIGHT INTERVIEW

The constable paused in the lane and considered. Up to the present he
felt he had done splendidly, and he congratulated himself on his
luck. But his next step he did not see clearly at all. Should he find
the nearest police station and advise the head constable, or should
he telephone, or even go to Scotland Yard? Or more difficult still,
should he remain where he was and look-out for fresh developments?

He paused irresolutely for some fifteen minutes pondering the
situation, and had almost made up his mind to telephone for
instructions to his own station, when he heard a footstep slowly
approaching along the lane. Anxious to remain unseen, he rapidly
regained the small gate in the hedge, passed inside and took up a
position behind the trunk of one of the small trees. The sounds grew
gradually nearer. Whoever was approaching was doing so exceedingly
slowly, and seemed to be coming on tiptoe. The steps passed the place
where the constable waited, and he could make out dimly the form of
what seemed to be a man of medium height. In a few seconds they
stopped, and then returned slowly past the constable, finally coming
to a stand close by the little gate. It was intensely still, and the
constable could hear the unknown yawning and softly clearing his
throat.

The last trace of light had gone from the sky and the stars were
showing brightly. There was no wind but a sharpness began to creep
into the air. At intervals came the disconnected sounds of night, the
bark of a dog, the rustle of some small animal in the grass, the rush
of a motor passing on the high road.

The constable’s problem was settled for him for the moment. He could
not move while the other watcher remained. He gave a gentle little
shiver and settled down to wait.

He began reckoning the time. It must, he thought, be about half-past
eight o’clock. It was about eight when the dray had turned into the
drive and he was sure half an hour at least must have passed since
then. He had leave until ten and he did not want to be late without
authority, though surely, under the circumstances, an excuse would be
made for him. He began to picture the scene if he were late, the cold
anger of the sergeant, the threat to report him, then his
explanation, the sudden change of manner. . . .

A faint click of what seemed to be the entrance gate of the drive
recalled him with a start to his present position. Footsteps sounded
on the gravel, firm, heavy footsteps, walking quickly. A man was
approaching the house.

Constable Walker edged round the tree trunk so as to get it between
himself and any light that might come from the hall door. The man
reached the door and rang.

In a few seconds a light appeared through the fanlight, and the door
was opened by the bearded man. A big, broad-shouldered man in a dark
overcoat and soft hat stood on the steps.

‘Hallo, Felix!’ cried the new-comer heartily. ‘Glad to see you’re at
home. When did you get back?’

‘That you, Martin? Come in. I got back on Sunday night.’

‘I’ll not go in, thanks, but I want you to come round and make up a
four at bridge. Tom Brice is with us, and he has brought along a
friend of his, a young solicitor from Liverpool. You’ll come, won’t
you?’

The man addressed as Felix hesitated a moment before replying.

‘Thanks, yes. I’ll go, certainly. But I’m all alone and I haven’t
changed. Come in a minute till I do so.’

‘And, if it’s a fair question, where did you get your dinner if
you’re all alone?’

‘In town. I’m only just home.’

They went in and the door was closed. Some few minutes later they
emerged again and, pulling the door behind them, disappeared down the
drive, the distant click of the gate signifying their arrival at the
road. As soon as this sounded, the watcher in the lane moved rapidly,
though silently, after them, and Constable Walker was left in
undisputed possession.

On the coast becoming clear he slipped out on to the lane, walked
down it to the road and turned back in the direction of London. As he
did so a clock struck nine.

Entering the first inn he came to, he called for a glass of ale and,
getting into conversation with the landlord, learnt that he was near
the hamlet of Brent, on the Great North Road, and that Mr. Felix’s
house was named St. Malo. He also inquired his way to the nearest
public telephone, which, fortunately, was close by.

A few minutes later he was speaking to Scotland Yard. He had to wait
for a little time while Inspector Burnley, who had gone home, was
being fetched, but in fifteen minutes he had made his report and was
awaiting instructions.

The Inspector questioned him closely about the position of the house,
finally instructing him to return to his post behind the tree and
await developments.

‘I will go out with some men now, and will look for you by the little
gate in the hedge.’

Constable Walker walked rapidly back, and as he did so the same clock
struck ten. He had been gone exactly an hour. In the meantime,
Inspector Burnley got a taxi and, after a careful examination of his
route and the district on a large scale map, started for St. Malo
with three other men. He called on his way at Walpole Terrace, Queen
Mary Road, where Tom Broughton lived and delighted that young man by
inviting him to join the party. On the way, he explained in detail
the lie of the house and grounds, where he wanted each man to stand,
and what was to be done in various eventualities. The streets were
full of people and motoring was slow, but it was still considerably
before eleven when they entered the Great North Road.

They ran on till the Inspector judged they were not far from the
house, when the car was run up a side road and the engine stopped.
The five men then walked on in silence.

‘Wait here,’ whispered Burnley, when they had gone some distance, and
slipped away into the dark. He found the lane, walked softly down it
until he came to the little gate, slipped inside and came up to
Constable Walker standing behind his tree.

‘I’m Inspector Burnley,’ he whispered. ‘Has any one come in or out
yet?’

‘No, sir.’

‘Well, wait here until I post my men.’

He returned to the others and, speaking in a whisper, gave his
directions.

‘You men take up the positions I explained to you. Listen out for a
whistle to close in. Mr. Broughton, you come with me and keep silent.’

The Inspector and his young acquaintance walked down the lane,
stopping outside the little gate. The other three men posted
themselves at various points in the grounds. And then they waited.

It seemed to Broughton that several hours must have passed when a
clock in the distance struck twelve. He and the Inspector were
standing beside each other concealed under the hedge. Once or twice
he had attempted whispered remarks, but Burnley was not responsive.
It was rather cold and the stars were bright. A light breeze had
risen and it rustled gently through the hedge and stirred the
branches of the trees. An insistent dog was barking somewhere away to
the right. A cart passed on the road, the wheels knocking on their
axles annoyingly. It took ages to get out of earshot, the sounds
coming in rotation through nearly a quarter of the compass. Then a
car followed with a swift rush, the glare of the headlights glancing
along through the trees. And still nothing happened.

After further ages the clock struck again--one. A second dog began
barking. The breeze freshened, and Broughton wished he had brought a
heavier coat. He longed to stamp up and down and ease his cramped
limbs. And then the latch of the road gate clicked and footsteps
sounded on the gravel.

They waited motionless as the steps came nearer. Soon a black shadow
came into view and moved to the hall door. There was a jingling of
keys; the rattling of a lock, the outline of the door became still
darker, the shadow disappeared within and the door was closed.

Immediately Burnley whispered to Broughton:--

‘I am going now to ring at the door, and when he opens it I will
flash my light in his face. Take a good look at him and if you are
sure--absolutely positive--it is Felix, say ‘yes,’ just the one word
‘yes.’ Do you understand?’

They went in through the small gate, no longer taking any precautions
against noise, walked to the door, and Burnley knocked loudly.

‘Now, remember, don’t speak unless you are sure,’ he whispered.

A light flickered through the fanlight and the door was opened. A
beam from the Inspector’s dark lantern flashed on the face of the man
within, revealing the same dark complexion and black beard that had
attracted Constable Walker’s attention. The word ‘Yes’ came from
Broughton and the Inspector said--

‘Mr. Léon Felix, I am Inspector Burnley from Scotland Yard. I have
called on rather urgent business, and would be glad of a few minutes’
conversation.’

The black-bearded man started.

‘Oh, certainly,’ he said, after a momentary pause, ‘though I don’t
know that it is quite the hour I would have suggested for a chat.
Will you come in?’

‘Thanks. I’m sorry it’s late, but I have been waiting for you for a
considerable time. Perhaps my man might sit in the hall out of the
cold?’

Burnley called over one of his men who had been stationed near the
summer-house.

‘Wait here till I speak to Mr. Felix, Hastings,’ he said, giving him
a sign to be ready if called on. Then, leaving Broughton outside with
Constable Walker and the other men, he followed Felix into a room on
the left of the hall.

It was fitted up comfortably though not luxuriously as a study. In
the middle of the room stood a flat-topped desk of modern design. Two
deep, leather-covered arm-chairs were drawn up on each side of the
fireplace, in which the embers still glowed. A tantalus stood on a
small side table with a box of cigars. The walls were lined with
bookshelves with here and there a good print. Felix lighted a
reading-lamp which stood on the desk. He turned to Burnley.

‘Is it a sitting down matter?’ he said, indicating one of the
arm-chairs. The Inspector took it while Felix dropped into the other.

‘I want, Mr. Felix,’ began the detective, ‘to make some inquiries
about a cask which you got from the steamer _Bullfinch_ this
morning--or rather yesterday, for this is really Tuesday--and which I
have reason to believe is still in your possession.’

‘Yes?’

‘The steamboat people think that a mistake has been made and that the
cask that you received was not the one consigned to you, and which
you expected.’

‘The cask I received is my own property. It was invoiced to me and
the freight was paid. What more do the shipping company want?’

‘But the cask you received was not addressed to you. It was invoiced
to a Mr. Felix of West Jubb Street, Tottenham Court Road.’

‘The cask was addressed to me. I admit the friend who sent it made a
mistake in the address, but it was for me all the same.’

‘But if we bring the other Mr. Felix--The West Jubb Street Mr.
Felix--here, and he also claims it, you will not then, I take it,
persist in your claim?’

The black-bearded man moved uneasily. He opened his mouth to reply,
and then hesitated. The Inspector felt sure he had seen the little
pitfall only just in time.

‘If you produce such a man,’ he said at last, ‘I am sure I can easily
convince him that the cask was really sent to me and not to him.’

‘Well, we shall see about that later. Meantime, another question.
What was in the cask you were expecting?’

‘Statuary.’

‘You are sure of that?’

‘Why, of course I’m sure. Really, Mr. Inspector, I’d like to know by
what right I am being subjected to this examination.’

‘I shall tell you, Mr. Felix. Scotland Yard has reason to believe
there is something wrong about that cask, and an investigation has
been ordered. You were naturally the first person to approach, but
since the cask turns out not to be yours, we shall----’

‘Not to be mine? What do you mean? Who says it is not mine?’

‘Pardon me, you yourself said so. You have just told me the cask you
expected contained statuary. We know the one you received does not
contain statuary. Therefore you have got the wrong one.’

Felix paled suddenly, and a look of alarm crept into his eyes.
Burnley leant forward and touched him on the knee.

‘You will see for yourself, Mr. Felix, that if this matter is to blow
over we must have an explanation of these discrepancies. I am not
suggesting you can’t give one. I am sure you can. But if you refuse
to do so you will undoubtedly arouse unpleasant suspicions.’

Felix remained silent, and the Inspector did not interrupt his train
of thought.

‘Well,’ he said at length, ‘I have really nothing to hide, only one
does not like being bluffed. I will tell you, if I can, what you want
to know. Satisfy me that you are from Scotland Yard.’

Burnley showed his credentials, and the other said:--

‘Very good. Then I may admit I misled you about the contents of the
cask, though I told you the literal and absolute truth. The cask is
full of plaques--plaques of kings and queens. Isn’t that statuary?
And if the plaques should be small and made of gold and called
sovereigns, aren’t they still statuary? That is what the cask
contains, Mr. Inspector. Sovereigns. £988 in gold.’

‘What else?’

‘Nothing else.’

‘Oh, come now, Mr. Felix. We knew there was money in the cask. We
also know there is something else. Think again.’

‘Oh, well, there will be packing, of course. I haven’t opened it and
I don’t know. But £988 in gold would go a small way towards filling
it. There will be sand or perhaps alabaster or some other packing.’

‘I don’t mean packing. Do you distinctly tell me no other special
object was included?’

‘Certainly, but I suppose I’d better explain the whole thing.’

He stirred the embers of the fire together, threw on a couple of logs
and settled himself more comfortably in his chair.




CHAPTER V

FELIX TELLS A STORY

‘I am a Frenchman, as you know,’ began Felix, ‘but I have lived in
London for some years, and I run over to Paris frequently on both
business and pleasure. About three weeks ago on one of these visits I
dropped into the Café Toisson d’Or in the rue Royale, where I joined
a group of acquaintances. The conversation turned on the French
Government lotteries, and one of the men, a M. Le Gautier, who had
been defending the system, said to me, “Why not join in a little
flutter?” I refused at first, but afterwards changed my mind and said
I would sport 500 francs if he did the same. He agreed, and I gave
him £20 odd as my share. He was to carry the business through in his
name, letting me know the result and halving the profits, if any. I
thought no more about the matter till last Friday, when, on my return
home in the evening, I found a letter from Le Gautier, which
surprised, pleased, and annoyed me in equal measure.’

Mr. Felix drew a letter from a drawer of his writing-table and passed
it to the Inspector. It was in French, and though the latter had a
fair knowledge of the language, he was not quite equal to the task,
and Mr. Felix translated. The letter ran as follows:--


                               ‘Rue de Vallorbes, 997,

                                            ‘Avenue Friedland,

                                                          ‘Paris.

                                    ‘Thursday, _1st April, 1912._

‘MY DEAR FELIX,--I have just had the most wonderful news! _We have
won!_ The lottery has drawn trumps and our 1000 francs has become
50,000--25,000 francs each! I shake both your hands!

‘The money I have already received, and I am sending your share at
once. And now, old chap, do not be very annoyed when I tell you I am
playing a little trick on you. I apologise.

‘You remember Dumarchez? Well, he and I had an argument about you
last week. We were discussing the ingenuity and resource of criminals
in evading the police. Your name happened to be mentioned, and I
remarked what a splendid criminal a man of your inventive talents
would make. He said “No,” that you were too transparently honest to
deceive the police. We got hot about it and finally arranged a little
test. I have packed your money in a cask, in English
sovereigns--there are 988 of them--and am booking it to you, carriage
paid, by the Insular and Continental Steam Navigation Company’s boat
from Rouen, due in London about Monday, 5th April. But I am
addressing it to “M. Léon Felix, 141 West Jubb Street, Tottenham
Court Road, London, W.,” and labelling it “Statuary only,” from
Dupierre et Cie., the monumental sculptors of Grenelle. It will take
some ingenuity to get a falsely addressed and falsely described cask
away from the steamer officials without being suspected of theft.
That is the test. I have bet Dumarchez an even 5000 francs that you
will do it. He says you will certainly be caught.

‘I send you my best congratulations on the greatness of your coup, of
which the visible evidence goes to you in the cask, and my only
regret is that I shall be unable to be present to see you open it.

‘With profound apologies,

                 ‘Yours very truly,

                       ‘ALPHONSE LE GAUTIER.

‘PS.--Please excuse the typewriter, but I have hurt my hand.’


‘I don’t know whether pleasure at the unexpected windfall of nearly
£1000, or annoyance at Le Gautier’s test with the cask was my
strongest emotion. The more I thought of this part of it, the more
angry I became. It was one thing that my friends should amuse
themselves by backing their silly theories it was quite another that
I should be the victim and scapegoat of their nonsense. Two things
obviously might lead to complications. If it came out that a cask
labelled “Statuary” contained gold, suspicion would be aroused, and
the same thing would happen if any one discovered the address to be
false. The contents of the cask might be questioned owing to the
weight--that I did not know; the false address might come to light if
an advice note of the cask’s arrival was sent out, while there was
always the fear of unforeseen accidents. I was highly incensed, and I
determined to wire early next morning to Le Gautier asking him not to
send the cask, and saying I would go over and get the money. But to
my further annoyance I had a card by the first post which said that
the cask had already been despatched.

‘It was clear to me then that I must make arrangements to get it away
as soon as possible after the boat came in, and before inquiries
began to be made. I accordingly made my plans and, as I did so, my
annoyance passed away and I got interested in the sporting side of
the affair. First, I had a few cards of the false address printed.
Then I found an obscure carting contractor, from whom I hired a
four-wheeled dray and two men, together with the use of an empty shed
for three days.

‘I had found out that the Steam Navigation boat would be due on the
following Monday, and on the preceding Saturday I brought the men and
the dray to the shed and prepared them for what I wanted done. To
enlist their help and prevent them becoming suspicious, I gave the
former a qualified version of Le Gautier’s story. I told them I had
made a bet and said I wanted their help to pull it off. A certain
cask was coming in by the Rouen boat, addressed to a friend of mine,
and he had bet me a large sum that I could not get this cask from the
steamer people and take it to my house, while I held that I could.
The point was to test the effectiveness of the ordinary business
precautions. In order, I told the men, that no real trouble should
arise and that I should not, in the event of failure, be charged with
theft, my friend had given me a written authorisation to take the
cask. This I had written out previously and I showed it to them.
Finally, I promised them two pounds each if we succeeded.

‘I had got a couple of pots of quick-drying blue and white paint, and
I altered the lettering on the dray to that of the address my Paris
friend had put on the cask. I am skilful at this kind of work and I
did it myself.

‘On Monday morning we drove to the docks, and I found the _Bullfinch_
had just come in with the Paris goods aboard. She was discharging
casks from the forehold, and I strolled along the wharf and had a
look at the work. The casks coming ashore were wine-casks, but I
noticed one at the side of the hold, over which one of the dockers
and a young man who looked like a clerk were bending. They seemed
very engrossed, and of course I wondered, “Is this my cask, and have
they discovered the gold?” I spoke to the young man, found that the
cask was mine, and asked him if I could get it away at once.

‘He was quite polite, but would not help me, referring me to the quay
office and offering to take me there and find a clerk to attend to
me. As we were leaving he called out to the man at the cask, “You
understand, Harkness, to do nothing till you hear from Mr. Avery.”’

At the wharf office the young man left me in the outer office while
he went, as he said, to get the proper clerk for my work. But he
returned with a man that was evidently the manager, and I knew at
once that something was wrong. This opinion was confirmed when the
manager began raising objection after objection to letting the cask
go.

‘Some judicious questions elicited the fact that “Mr. Avery” was the
managing director in the head office in Fenchurch Street. I left the
wharf office, sat down on some boxes, and thought out the situation.

‘It was clear that something had aroused the suspicions of the clerk
and the docker, Harkness, and the former’s remark to the latter to do
nothing without instructions from Mr. Avery seemed to mean that the
matter was to be laid before that gentleman. To “do nothing”
evidently meant to hold on to the cask. If I were to get my property
it was clear I must see to the supplying of those instructions myself.

‘I went to Fenchurch Street and asked for Mr. Avery. Fortunately for
me he was engaged. I said I could not wait, and asked for a sheet of
paper and envelope on which to write him a note. By the simple
expedient of sealing and addressing the empty envelope, I thus
provided myself with a sheet of paper bearing the firm’s heading.

‘I dropped into a bar and, ordering some ale, borrowed a pen and ink.
Then I composed a letter from Mr. Avery to Harkness, instructing him
to hand over the cask at once to me.

‘While I was writing this it occurred to me that if this man’s
suspicions were really seriously aroused, he would probably follow
the cask and thus trace me to my house. I lost another quarter of an
hour pondering this problem. Then an idea occurred to me, and I added
a paragraph saying that as the Navigation Company had contracted to
deliver the cask at an address in the city, he, Harkness, was to
accompany it and see that it reached its destination safely.

‘I wrote the letter in the round hand of a junior clerk, signing it
“The I. and C. S. N. Co., Ltd., per” in the same hand, and “Avery”
with an undecipherable initial in another kind of writing, and
another “per,” and then two not very clear initials. I hoped in this
way to mislead Harkness, if he happened to know the genuine signature.

‘It was my design to get Harkness away from the ship with the cask
and my own men, when I hoped to find some way of giving him the slip.
This I eventually did by instructing one of the men to clamour for a
drink, and the other, a man named Watty, to refuse to leave the horse
when I invited the party to a bar for some beer. On the plea of
relieving Watty, I left Harkness and the other man drinking in the
bar, and slipped away with Watty and the dray. Then he and I went
back to the shed and I ran a coat of paint over the dray, restoring
it to its original brown and painting out the fictitious name. In the
evening we brought the dray home, timing ourselves to arrive here
after dark, and unloaded the cask in one of the out-houses, where it
now is.’

When Felix ceased speaking, the two men sat in silence for several
minutes while Burnley turned the statement over in his mind. The
sequence of events was unusual, but the story hung together, and, as
he went over it in detail, he could see no reason why it should not,
from Felix’s point of view, be true. If Felix believed his friend’s
letter, as he appeared to, his actions were accounted for, and if the
cask really contained a statue, the letter might explain the whole
thing. On the other hand, if it held a corpse, the letter was a
fraud, to which Felix might or might not be party.

Gradually, as he pondered, the matter shaped itself into three main
considerations.

First, there was Felix’s general bearing and manner. The Inspector
had a long and varied experience of men who told the truth and of men
who lied, and all his instincts led him to believe this man. He was
aware that such instincts are liable to error--he had himself erred
on more than one occasion in the past--yet he could not overlook the
fact that Felix’s bearing, as far as his impression went, was that of
a sincere and honest man. Such a consideration would not be a
decisive factor in his conclusion, but it would undoubtedly weigh.

Secondly, there was Felix’s account of his actions in London. Of the
truth of this the Inspector had already received considerable
independent testimony. He reviewed the chain of events and was
surprised to find how few statements of Felix were unsupported. His
first visit to the _Bullfinch_ had been described in almost similar
terms by Broughton and by Huston in the wharf office. His call at the
Fenchurch Street office and the ruse by which he obtained the
shipping company’s headed notepaper had been testified to by Mr.
Avery and his chief clerk, Wilcox. His description of the letter he
had written to Harkness was certainly accurate from the Inspector’s
own knowledge. His account of the removal of the cask and the shaking
off of Harkness was in agreement with the statement of the latter and
finally, Felix’s description of the removal of the cask to its
present resting place was fully corroborated by Constable Walker.

There was practically no part of the statement unsupported by outside
evidence. In fact, Inspector Burnley could not recall any case where
so much confirmation of a suspect’s story was forthcoming. Weighing
the matter point by point, he came to the deliberate conclusion that
he must unreservedly believe it.

So much for Felix’s actions in London. But there was a third
point--his actions in Paris, culminating in the letter of his friend.
The letter. That was the kernel of the nut. Was it really written
under the circumstances described? Had Le Gautier written it? Was
there even such a man as Le Gautier? All this, he thought, it should
not be difficult to find out. He would get some more information from
Felix and if necessary slip across to Paris and put the statements to
the test. He broke the silence.

‘Who is M. Le Gautier?’

‘Junior partner in the firm of Le Gautier, Fils, wine merchants, in
the rue Henri Quatre.’

‘And M. Dumarchez?’

‘A stockbroker.’

‘Can you give me his address?’

‘I don’t know his home address. His office is, I think, in the
Boulevard Poissonière. But I could get you the address from M. Le
Gautier.’

‘Please give me an account of your relations with these gentlemen.’

‘Well, I have known them both for years and we are good friends, but
I cannot recall ever having had any money transactions with either
until this matter of the lottery.’

‘The details of that mentioned in the letter are correct?’

‘Oh, perfectly.’

‘Can you remember where precisely the conversation about the lottery
took place?’

‘It was in the ground floor room of the café, at the window to the
right of the entrance, looking inwards.’

‘You say other gentlemen were present?’

‘Yes, a group of us were there and the conversation was general.’

‘Was your arrangement to enter the lottery heard by the group?’

‘Yes, we had quite a lot of good-natured chaff about it.’

‘And can you remember who were present?’

Mr. Felix hesitated.

‘I’m not sure that I can,’ he said at last. ‘The group was quite a
casual one and I only joined it for a few moments. Le Gautier was
there, of course, and a man called Daubigny, and Henri Boisson, and I
think, Jaques Rôget, but of him I’m not sure. There were a number of
others also.’

Felix answered the questions readily and the Inspector noted his
replies. He felt inclined to believe the lottery business was
genuine. At all events inquiries in Paris would speedily establish
the point. But even if it was all true, that did not prove that Le
Gautier had written the letter. A number of people had heard the
conversation, and any one could have written it, even Felix himself.
Ah, that was an idea! Could Felix be the writer? Was there any way of
finding that out? The Inspector considered and then spoke again.

‘Have you the envelope this letter came in?’

‘Eh?’ said Felix, ‘the envelope? Why, no, I’m sure I haven’t. I never
keep them.’

‘Or the card?’

Felix turned over the papers on his desk and rummaged in the drawers.

‘No,’ he answered, ‘I can’t find it. I must have destroyed it, too.’

There was then no proof that these communications had been received
by Felix. On the other hand there was no reason to doubt it. The
Inspector kept an open mind as he turned again to the letter.

It was typewritten on rather thin, matt surfaced paper and, though
Burnley was not an expert, he believed the type was foreign. Some
signs of wear were present which he thought might identify the
typewriter. The n’s and the r’s were leaning slightly to the right,
the t’s and the e’s were below alignment, and the l’s had lost the
horizontal bar at the top of the down-stroke. He held the paper up to
the light. The watermark was somewhat obscured by the type, but after
a time he made it out. It was undoubtedly French paper. This, of
course, would not weigh much, as Felix by his own statement, was
frequently in Paris, but still it did weigh.

The Inspector read the letter again. It was divided into four
paragraphs and he pondered each in turn. The first was about the
lottery. He did not know much about French lotteries, but the
statements made could at least be verified. With the help of the
French police it would be easy to find out if any drawings and
payments had recently been made, and he could surely get a list of
the winners. A winner of 50,000 francs, living in or near Paris,
should be easily traced.

The second and third paragraphs were about the bet and the sending of
the cask. Burnley turned the details over in his mind. Was the whole
story a likely one? It certainly did not strike him as such. Even if
such an unusual bet had been made, the test was an extremely poor
one. He could hardly believe that a man who could invent the plan of
the cask would not have done better. And yet it was undoubtedly
possible.

Another idea entered the Inspector’s mind. He had, perhaps, been
thinking too much of the £988, and too little of the woman’s hand.
Suppose there really was a corpse in the cask. What then?

Such an assumption made all the circumstances more serious and
explained partly the sending of the cask, but it did not, so far as
the Inspector could see, throw light on the method of doing so. But
when he came to the fourth paragraph he saw that it might easily bear
two meanings. He read it again:--



‘I send you my best congratulations on the greatness of your coup, of
which the visible evidence goes to you in the cask, and my only
regret is that I shall be unable to be present to see you open it.’



This seemed at first sight obviously to mean congratulations on
winning the lottery, the ‘visible evidence’ of which, namely £988 in
gold, was in the cask. But did it really mean this? Did a more
sinister interpretation not also offer itself? Suppose the body was
the ‘visible evidence’? Suppose the death was the result, possibly
indirect, of something that Felix had done. If money only was being
sent, why should Le Gautier experience regret that he could not see
the cask opened? But if a corpse was unexpectedly hidden there, would
not that statement be clarified? It certainly looked so. One thing at
least seemed clear. If a corpse had been sent to Felix, he must know
something of the circumstances leading up to it. The Inspector spoke
again:--

‘I am obliged for your statement, Mr. Felix, which, I may be allowed
to say, I fully accept so far as it goes. But I fear you have not
told me everything?’

‘I have told you everything material.’

‘Then I am afraid we are not in agreement as to what is material. At
all events, it all goes back to my original question, “What is in the
cask?”’

‘Do you not accept my statement that it is money?’

‘I accept your statement that you believe it to be money. I do not
necessarily accept your authority for that belief.’

‘Well,’ said Felix, jumping up, ‘the cask’s in the coach-house and I
see there is nothing for it but to go and open it now. I did not want
to do so to-night, as I did not want to have all that gold lying
loose about the house, but it’s clear nothing else will satisfy you.’

‘Thank you, Mr. Felix, I wanted you to make the suggestion. It is, as
you say, the only way to settle the matter. I’ll call Sergeant
Hastings here as a witness and we’ll go now.’

In silence, Felix got a lantern and led the way. They passed through
a back-door into the yard and paused at the coach-house door.

‘Hold the light, will you, while I get the keys.’

Burnley threw a beam on the long running bolt that closed the two
halves of the door. A padlock held the handle down on the staple.
Felix inserted a key, but at his first touch the lock fell open.

‘Why, the thing’s not fastened!’ he cried, ‘and I locked it myself a
few hours ago!’

He removed the padlock and withdrew the running bolt, swinging the
large door open. Burnley flashed in the lantern.

‘Is the cask here?’ he said.

‘Yes, swinging there from the ceiling,’ answered Felix, as he came
over from fastening back the door. Then his jaw dropped and he stared
fixedly.

‘My heavens!’ he gasped, in a strangled tone, ‘it’s gone! The cask’s
gone!’




CHAPTER VI

THE ART OF DETECTION

Astonished as Burnley was himself at this unexpected development, he
did not forget to keep a keen watch on Felix. That the latter was
genuinely amazed and dumbfounded he could not doubt. Not only was his
surprise too obviously real to be questioned, but his anger and
annoyance at losing his money were clearly heartfelt.

‘I locked it myself. I locked it myself,’ he kept on repeating. ‘It
was there at eight o’clock, and who could get at it since then? Why,
no one but myself knew about it. How could any one else have known?’

‘That’s what we have to find out,’ returned the Inspector. ‘Come back
to the house, Mr. Felix, and let us talk it over. We cannot do
anything outside until it gets light.’

‘You may not know,’ he continued, ‘that you were followed here with
your cask by one of our men, who watched you unloading it in the
coach-house. He waited till you left with your friend Martin, a few
minutes before nine. He then had to leave to advise me of the matter,
but he was back at the house by ten. From ten till after eleven he
watched alone, but since then the house has been surrounded by my
men, as I rather expected to find a gang instead of a single man.
Whoever took the cask must therefore have done so between nine and
ten.’

Felix stared at his companion open-mouthed.

‘By Jove!’ he said. ‘You amaze me. How in thunder did you get on my
track?’

Burnley smiled.

‘It is our business to know these things,’ he answered, ‘I knew all
about how you got the cask away from the docks also.’

‘Well, thank Heaven! I told you the truth.’

‘It was the wise thing, Mr. Felix. I was able to check your
statements as you went along, and I may say I felt really glad when I
heard you were going to be straight. At the same time, sir, you will
realise that my orders prevent me being satisfied until I have seen
the contents of the cask.’

‘You cannot be more anxious to recover it than I am, for I want my
money.’

‘Naturally,’ said Burnley, ‘but before we discuss the matter excuse
me a moment. I want to give my fellows some instructions.’

He went out and called the men together. Sergeant Hastings and
Constable Walker he retained, the rest he sent home in the car with
instructions to return at eight o’clock in the morning. To Broughton
he bade ‘Good-night,’ thanking him for his presence and help.

When he re-entered the study Felix made up the fire and drew forward
the whisky and cigars.

‘Thank you, I don’t mind if I do,’ said the detective, sinking back
into his chair. ‘Now, Mr. Felix, let us go over every one that knew
about the cask being there.’

‘No one but myself and the carter, I assure you.’

‘Yourself, the carter, myself, and my man Walker--four to start with.’

Felix smiled.

‘As far as I am concerned,’ he said, ‘I left here, as you appear, to
know, almost immediately after the arrival of the cask and did not
return till after one o’clock. All of that time I was in the company
of Dr. William Martin and a number of mutual friends. So I can prove
an alibi.’

Burnley smiled also.

‘For me,’ he said, ‘I am afraid you will have to take my word. The
house was watched by Walker from ten o’clock, and we may take it as
quite impossible that anything could have been done after that hour.’

‘There remains therefore the carter.’

‘There remains therefore the carter, and, as we must neglect no
possibilities, I will ask you to give me the address of the cartage
firm and any information about the man that you may have.’

‘John Lyons and Son, 127 Maddox Street, Lower Beechwood Road, was the
contractor. The carter’s name, beyond Watty, I don’t know. He was a
rather short, wiry chap, with a dark complexion and small black
moustache.’

‘And now, Mr. Felix, can you not think of any others who may have
known about the cask?’

‘There was no one,’ replied the other with decision.

‘I’m afraid we can’t assume that. We certainly can’t be sure.’

‘Who could there be?’

‘Well, your French friend. How do you know he didn’t write to others
beside you?’

Felix sat up as if he had been shot.

‘By Jove!’ he cried, ‘it never entered my head. But it’s most
unlikely--most unlikely.’

‘The whole thing’s most unlikely as far as that goes. Perhaps you are
not aware that some one else was watching the house last evening?’

‘Good God, Inspector! What do you mean?’

‘Some one came to the lane shortly after your arrival with the cask.
He waited and heard your conversation with your friend Martin. When
you and your friend left, he followed you.’

Felix passed his hand over his forehead. His face was pale.

‘This business is too much for me,’ he said. ‘I wish to heaven I was
out of it.’

‘Then help me to get you out of it. Think. Is there any one your
friend knows that he might have written to?’

Felix remained silent for some moments.

‘There is only one man,’ he said at length in a hesitating voice,
‘that I know he is friendly with--a Mr. Percy Murgatroyd, a mining
engineer who has an office in Westminster. But I don’t for one moment
believe he had anything to say to it.’

‘Let me have his name and address, anyway.’

‘Four St. John’s Mansions, Victoria Street,’ said Felix, on referring
to an address book.

‘You might write it down, if you please, and sign it.’

Felix looked up with a smile.

‘You generally write notes yourself, I should have thought?’

Burnley laughed.

‘You’re very quick, Mr. Felix. Of course it’s your handwriting I want
also. But I assure you it’s only routine. Now please, think. Is there
any one else?’

‘Not a living soul that I know of.’

‘Very well, Mr. Felix. I want to ask just one other question. Where
did you stay in Paris?’

‘At the Hotel Continental.’

‘Thanks, that’s everything. And now, if you will allow me, I will
take a few winks here in the chair till it gets light, and if you
take my advice you will turn in.’

Felix looked at his watch.

‘Quarter-past three. Well, perhaps I shall. I’m only sorry I cannot
offer you a bed as the house is absolutely empty, but if you will
take a shakedown in the spare room----?’

‘No, no, thanks very much, I shall be all right here.’

‘As you wish. Good night.’

When Felix had left, the Inspector sat on in his chair smoking his
strong black cigars and thinking. He did not sleep, though he
remained almost motionless, only at long intervals rousing up to
light another cigar, and it was not until five had struck that he got
up and looked out of the window.

‘Light at last,’ he muttered, as he let himself quietly out of the
back-door into the yard.

His first care was to make a thorough search in the yard and all the
out-houses to ensure that the cask was really gone and not merely
hidden in some other room. He was speedily satisfied on this point.

Since it was gone it was obvious that it must have been removed on a
vehicle. His next point was to see how that vehicle got in, and if it
had left any traces. And first as to the coach-house door.

He picked up the padlock and examined it carefully. It was an
ordinary old-fashioned four-inch one. The ring had been forced open
while locked, the hole in the opening end through which the bolt
passes being torn away. Marks showed that this had been done by
inserting some kind of lever between the body of the lock and the
staple on the door, through which the ring had been passed. The
Inspector looked round for the lever, but could not find it. He
therefore made a note to search for such a tool, as if it bore marks
which would fit those on the door, its evidence might be important.

There was next the question of the yard gate. This opened inwards in
two halves, and was fastened by a wooden beam hinged through the
centre to the edge of one of the half gates. When it was turned
vertically the gates were free, but when horizontally it engaged with
brackets, one on each half gate, thus holding them closed. It could
be fastened by a padlock, but none was fitted. The gate now stood
closed and with the beam lying in the brackets.

The Inspector took another note to find out if Mr. Felix had locked
the beam, and then stood considering. It was clear the gate must have
been closed from the inside after the vehicle had gone out. It must
have been opened similarly on the latter’s arrival. Who had done
this? Was Felix lying, and was there some one else in the house?

At first it seemed likely, and then the Inspector thought of another
way. Constable Walker had climbed the wall. Why should not the person
who opened and shut the gate have also done so? The Inspector moved
slowly along the wall scrutinising it and the ground alongside it.

At first he saw nothing out of the common, but on retracing his steps
he noticed, about three yards from the gate, two faint marks of mud
or dust on the plaster. These were some six feet from the ground and
about fifteen inches apart. On the soft soil which had filled in
between the cobble stones in this disused part of the yard, about a
foot from the wall and immediately under these marks, were two
sharp-edged depressions, about two inches long by half an inch wide,
arranged with their longer dimensions in line. Some one had clearly
used a short ladder.

Inspector Burnley stood gazing at the marks. It struck him they were
very far apart for a ladder. He measured the distance between them
and found it was fifteen inches. Ladders, he knew, are about twelve.

Opening the gate he went to the outside of the wall. A grass plot ran
alongside it here and the Inspector, stooping down, searched for
corresponding marks. He was not disappointed. Two much deeper
depressions showed where the ends of the ladder-like apparatus had
sunk into the softer ground. These were not narrow like those in the
yard, but rectangular and of heavier stuff, three inches by two, he
estimated. He looked at the plaster on the wall above, but it was not
till he examined it through his lens that he was satisfied it bore
two faint scratches, corresponding in position to the muddy marks on
the opposite side.

A further thought struck him. Scooping up a little soil from the
grass, he went again into the yard and compared with his lens the
soil and the dry mud of the marks on the plaster. As he had
anticipated, they were identical.

He could now dimly reconstruct what had happened. Some one had placed
a peculiar kind of ladder against the outside of the wall and
presumably crossed it and opened the gate. The ladder had then been
carried round and placed against the inside of the wall, but,
probably by accident, _opposite end up_. The outside plaster was
therefore clean but scraped, while that on the inside bore traces of
the soil from the ends that had stood on the grass. In going out
after barring the gate, he imagined the thief had pulled the ladder
after him with a cord and passed it over the wall.

The Inspector returned to the grass and made a further search. Here
he found confirmation of his theory in a single impression of one of
the legs of the ladder some two feet six out from the wall. That, he
decided, had been caused by the climber throwing down the ladder when
leaving the yard. He also found three footmarks, but, unfortunately,
they were so blurred as to be valueless.

He took out his notebook and made a sketch with accurate dimensions
showing what he had learnt of the ladder--its length, width, and the
shape of the legs at each end. Then bringing out the steps Felix had
used to hang the chain blocks, he got on the wall. He examined the
cement coping carefully, but without finding any further traces.

The yard, being paved, no wheel or footmarks were visible, but
Burnley spent quite a long time crossing and recrossing it, examining
every foot of ground in the hope of finding some object that had been
dropped. Once before, in just such another case, he had had the luck
to discover a trouser button concealed under some leaves, a find
which had led to penal servitude for two men. On this occasion he was
disappointed, his search being entirely unsuccessful.

He went out on the drive. Here were plenty of marks, but try as he
would he could make nothing of them. The surface was covered thickly
with fine gravel and only showed vague disturbances with no clear
outlines. He began methodically to search the drive as he had done
the yard. Every foot was examined in turn, Burnley gradually working
down towards the gate. After he left the immediate neighbourhood of
the house the gravel became much thinner, but the surface below was
hard and bore no marks. He continued perseveringly until he got near
the gate, and then he had some luck.

In the lawn between the house and the road some work was in progress.
It seemed to Burnley that a tennis or croquet ground was being made.
From the corner of this ground a recently filled in cut ran across
the drive and out to the hedge adjoining the lane. Evidently a drain
had just been laid.

[Illustration: Footprint]

Where this drain passed under the drive the newly filled ground had
slightly sunk. The hollow had been made up in the middle with gravel,
but it happened that a small space on the lane side which had not
gone down much was almost uncovered, the clay showing through. On
this space were two clearly defined footmarks, pointing in the
direction of the house.

I have said two, but that is not strictly correct. One, that of a
workman’s right boot with heavy hobnails, was complete in every
detail, the clay holding the impression like plaster of Paris. The
other, some distance in front and to the left and apparently the next
step forward, was on the edge of the clay patch and showed the heel
only, the sole having borne on the hard.

Inspector Burnley’s eyes brightened. Never had he seen better
impressions. Here was something tangible at last. He bent down to
examine them more closely, then suddenly sprang to his feet with a
gesture of annoyance.

‘Fool that I am,’ he growled, ‘that’s only Watty bringing up the
cask.’

All the same he made a careful sketch of the marks, showing the
distance between them and the size of the clay patch. Watty, he felt
sure, would be easy to find through the carting establishment, when
he could ascertain if the footsteps were his. If it should chance
they were not, he had probably found a useful clue to the thief. For
the convenience of the reader I reproduce the sketch.

Burnley turned to go on, but his habit of thinking things out
reasserted itself, and he stood gazing at the marks and slowly
pondering. He was puzzled that the steps were so close together. He
took out his rule and re-measured the distance between them. Nineteen
inches from heel to heel. That was surely very close. A man of
Watty’s size would normally take a step of at least thirty inches,
and carters were generally long-stepping men. If he had put it at
thirty-two or thirty-three inches he would probably be nearer the
thing. Why, then, this short step?

He looked and pondered. Then suddenly a new excitement came into his
eyes and he bent swiftly down again.

‘Jove!’ he murmured. ‘Jove! I nearly missed that! It makes it more
like Watty, and, if so, it is conclusive! Absolutely conclusive!’ His
cheek was flushed and his eyes shone.

‘That probably settles that hash,’ said the evidently delighted
Inspector. He, nevertheless, continued his methodical search down the
remainder of the drive and out on the road, but without further
result.

He looked at his watch. It was seven o’clock.

‘Two more points and I’m through,’ he said to himself in a satisfied
tone.

He turned into the lane and walked slowly down it, scrutinising the
roadway as he had done the drive. Three separate times he stopped to
examine and measure footmarks, the third occasion being close by the
little gate in the hedge.

‘Number one point done. Now for number two,’ he muttered, and
returning to the entrance gate stood for a moment looking up and down
the road. Choosing the direction of London he walked for a quarter of
a mile examining the gateways at either side, particularly those that
led into fields. Apparently he did not find what he was in search of,
for he retraced his steps to where a cross road led off to the left
and continued his investigations along it. No better luck rewarding
him, he tried a second cross road with the same result. There being
no other cross roads, he returned to the lane and set out again, this
time with his back to London. At the third gateway, one leading into
a field on the left-hand side of the road, he stopped.

It was an ordinary iron farm gate set in the rather high and thick
hedge that bounded the road. The field was in grass and bore the
usual building ground notice. Immediately aside the gate was a patch
of low and swampy looking ground, and it was a number of fresh wheel
marks crossing this patch that had caught the Inspector’s attention.

The gate was not padlocked, and Burnley slipped the bolt back and
entered the field. He examined the wheel marks with great care. They
turned sharply at right angles on passing through the gate and led
for a short distance along the side of the fence, stopping beside a
tree which grew in the hedge. The hoof marks of a horse and the
prints of a man’s hobnailed boots leading over the same ground also
came in for a close scrutiny.

It was a contented looking Burnley that turned out of the field and
walked back to St. Malo. He was well satisfied with his night’s work.
He had firstly succeeded in getting a lot of information out of
Felix, and had further turned the latter into a friend anxious to
help in the clearing up of the mystery. And though an unexpected
check had arisen in the disappearance of the cask, he felt that with
the information he had gained in the last three hours it would not be
long before he had his hands on it again.

As he approached the door Felix hailed him.

‘I saw you coming up,’ he said. ‘What luck?’

‘Oh, not so bad, not so bad,’ returned the other. ‘I’m just going
back to the city.’

‘But the cask? What about it?’

‘I’ll start some inquiries that may lead to something.’

‘Oh, come now, Inspector, don’t be so infernally close. You might
tell me what you’ve got in your mind, for I can see you have
something.’

Burnley laughed.

‘Oh, well,’ he said, ‘I don’t mind. I’ll tell you what I found; you
see what you make of it.

‘First, I found your coach-house padlock had been forced with a
lever. There was nothing of the kind lying about, therefore whatever
theory we adopt must account for this lever’s production and
disposal. It may quite likely bear marks corresponding to those on
the padlock, which evidence might be valuable.

‘I then found that your visitor had arrived at the yard gate with a
vehicle and had climbed the wall with the aid of a very peculiar
ladder. He had, presumably, opened the gate and, after loading up the
cask and drawing his vehicle out on to the drive, had closed the
gate, leaving by the same means. There is evidence to show that he
lifted the ladder over after him, probably pulling it up by a cord.

‘I have said the ladder was a peculiar one. Here is a sketch of its
shape so far as I could learn it. You will see that it is short and
wide with the ends shaped differently.

‘I may remind you, in passing, how easy it would have been to load up
the cask in spite of its weight. All that was necessary was to back
the vehicle under it and lower out the differential pulley, a thing a
man could do with one hand.

‘I examined the drive, but could find nothing except at one place
where there was a most interesting pair of footmarks. You must really
see these for yourself, and if you will stroll down now I will point
them out. There is reason to believe they were made by Watty when he
was approaching the house with the dray, but I cannot be positive as
yet.

‘I then examined the lane and found in three places other footmarks
by the same man. Finally, about 200 yards along the main road to the
north, I found wheel marks leading into a grass field beside which he
had walked.

‘Now, Mr. Felix, put all these things together. You will find them
suggestive, but the footmarks on the drive are very nearly
conclusive.’

They had by this time reached the marks.

‘Here we are,’ said Burnley. ‘What do you think of these?’

‘I don’t see anything very remarkable about them.’

‘Look again.’

Felix shook his head.

‘See here, Mr. Felix. Stand out here on the gravel and put your right
foot in line with this first print. Right. Now take a step forward as
if you were walking to the house. Right. Does anything occur to you
now?’

‘I can’t say that it does, unless it is that I have taken a very much
longer step.’

‘But your step was of normal length.’

‘Well then, conversely, the unknown must have taken a short one.’

‘But did he? Assume it was Watty, as I think it must have been. You
were with him and you saw him walking.’

‘Oh, come now, Inspector. How could I tell that? He didn’t normally
take very short steps or I should have noticed it, but I couldn’t
possibly say that he never took one.’

‘The point is not essential except that it calls attention to a
peculiarity in the steps. But you must admit that while possible, it
is quite unlikely he would take a step of that length--nineteen
inches as against a probable thirty-three--without stumbling or
making a false step.’

‘But how do you know he didn’t stumble?’

‘The impression, my dear sir, the impression. A false step or a
stumble would have made a blurred mark or shown heavier on one side
than the other. This print shows no slip and is evenly marked all
over. It was clearly made quite normally.’

‘That seems reasonable, but I don’t see how it matters.’

‘To me it seems exceedingly suggestive though, I agree, not
conclusive. But there is a nearly conclusive point, Mr. Felix. Look
at those prints again.’

‘They convey nothing to me.’

‘Compare them.’

‘Well, I can only compare the heels and there is not much difference
between them, just as you would expect between the heels of a pair of
boots.’ Felix hesitated. ‘By Jove! Inspector,’ he went on, ‘I’ve got
you at last. They’re the same marks. They were both made by the same
foot.’

‘I think so, Mr. Felix; you have it now. Look here.’ The Inspector
stooped. ‘The fourth nail on the lefthand side is gone. That alone
might be a coincidence, but if you compare the wear of the other
nails and of the leather you will see they are the same beyond doubt.’

He pointed to several little inequalities and inaccuracies in the
outline, each of which appeared in both the marks.

‘But even if they are the same, I don’t know that I see what you get
from that.’

‘Don’t you? Well, look here. How could Watty, if it was he, have
produced them? Surely only in one of two ways. Firstly, he could have
hopped on one foot. But there are three reasons why it is unlikely he
did that. One is that he could hardly have done it without your
noticing it. Another, that he could never have left so clear an
impression in that way. The third, why should he hop? He simply
wouldn’t do it. Therefore they were made in the second way. What was
that, Mr. Felix?’

Felix started.

‘I see what you’re after at last,’ he said. ‘He walked up the drive
twice.’

‘Of course he did. He walked up first with you to leave the cask. He
walked up the second time with the empty dray to get it. If the
impressions were really made by Watty that seems quite certain.’

‘But what on earth would Watty want with the cask? He could not know
there was money in it.’

‘Probably not, but he must have guessed it held something valuable.’

‘Inspector, you overwhelm me with delight. If he took the cask it
will surely be easy to trace it.’

‘It may or it may not. Question is, Are we sure he was acting for
himself.’

‘Who else?’

‘What about your French friend? You don’t know whom he may have
written to. You don’t know that all your actions with the cask may
not have been watched.’

‘Oh, don’t make things worse than they are. Trace this Watty, won’t
you?’

‘Of course we will, but it may not be so easy as you seem to think.
At the same time there are two other points, both of which seem to
show he was at least alone.’

‘Yes?’

‘The first is the watcher in the lane. That was almost certainly the
man who walked twice up your drive. I told you I found his footmarks
at three points along it. One was near your little gate, close beside
and pointing to the hedge, showing he was standing there. That was at
the very point my man saw the watcher.

‘The second point concerns the horse and dray, and this is what leads
me to believe the watcher was really Watty. If Watty was listening up
the lane where were these? If he had a companion the latter would
doubtless have walked them up and down the road. But if he was alone
they must have been hidden somewhere while he made his
investigations. I’ve been over most of the roads immediately
surrounding, and on my fourth shot--towards the north, as I already
told you--I found the place. It is fairly clear what took place. On
leaving the cask he had evidently driven along the road until he
found a gate that did not lead to a house. It was, as I said, that of
a field. The marks there are unmistakable. He led the dray in behind
the hedge and tied the horse to a tree. Then he came back to
reconnoitre and heard you going out. He must have immediately
returned and brought the dray, got the cask, and cleared out, and I
imagine he was not many minutes gone before my man Walker returned.
What do you think of that for a working theory?’

‘I think it’s conclusive. Absolutely conclusive. And that explains
the queer-shaped ladder.’

‘Eh, what? What’s that you say?’

‘It must have been the gangway business for loading barrels on the
dray. I saw one hooked on below the deck.’

Burnley smote his thigh a mighty slap.

‘One for you, Mr. Felix,’ he cried, ‘one for you, sir. I never
thought of it. That points to Watty again.’

‘Inspector, let me congratulate you. You have got evidence that makes
the thing a practical certainty.’

‘I think it’s a true bill. And now, sir, I must be getting back to
the Yard.’ Burnley hesitated and then went on: ‘I am extremely sorry
and I’m afraid you won’t like it, but I shall be straight with you
and tell you I cannot--I simply dare not--leave you without some kind
of police supervision until this cask business is cleared up. But I
give you my word you shall not be annoyed.’

Felix smiled.

‘That’s all right. You do your duty. The only thing I ask you is to
let me know how you get on.’

‘I hope we’ll have some news for you later in the day.’

It was now shortly after eight, and the car had arrived with the two
men sent back the previous evening. Burnley gave them instructions
about keeping a watch on Felix, then with Sergeant Hastings and
Constable Walker he entered the car and was driven rapidly towards
London.




CHAPTER VII

THE CASK AT LAST

Inspector Burnley reached Scotland Yard, after dropping Constable
Walker at his station with remarks which made the heart of that
observer glow with triumph and conjured up pictures of the day when
he, Inspector Walker, would be one of the Yard’s most skilled and
trusted officers. During the run citywards Burnley had thought out
his plan of campaign, and he began operations by taking Sergeant
Hastings to his office and getting down the large scale map.

‘Look here, Hastings,’ he said, when he had explained his theories
and found what he wanted. ‘Here’s John Lyons and Son, the carriers
where Watty is employed, and from where the dray was hired. You see
it’s quite a small place. Here close by is Goole Street, and here is
the Goole Street Post Office. Got the lay of those? Very well. I want
you, when you’ve had your breakfast, to go out there and get on the
track of Watty. Find out first his full name and address, and wire or
phone it at once. Then shadow him. I expect he has the cask, either
at his own house or hidden somewhere, and he’ll lead you to it if
you’re there to follow. Probably he won’t be able to do anything till
night, but of that we can’t be certain. Don’t interfere or let him
see you if possible, but of course don’t let him open the cask if he
has not already done so, and under no circumstances allow him to take
anything out of it. I will follow you out and we can settle further
details. The Goole Street Post Office will be our headquarters, and
you can advise me there at, say, the even hours of your whereabouts.
Make yourself up as you think best and get to work as quickly as you
can.’

The sergeant saluted and withdrew.

‘That’s everything in the meantime, I think,’ said Burnley to
himself, as with a yawn he went home to breakfast.


When some time later Inspector Burnley emerged from his house, a
change had come over his appearance. He seemed to have dropped his
individuality as an alert and efficient representative of Scotland
Yard and taken on that of a small shop-keeper or contractor in a
small way of business. He was dressed in a rather shabby suit of
checks, with baggy knees and draggled coat. His tie was woefully
behind the fashion, his hat required brushing, and his boots were
soiled and down at heel. A slight stoop and a slouching walk added to
his almost slovenly appearance.

He returned to the Yard and asked for messages. Already a telephone
had come through from Sergeant Hastings: ‘Party’s name, Walter
Palmer, 71 Fennell Street, Lower Beechwood Road.’ Having had a
warrant made out for the ‘party’s’ arrest, he got a police motor with
plain-clothes driver, and left for the scene of operations.

It was another glorious day. The sun shone out of a cloudless sky of
clearest blue. The air had the delightful freshness of early spring.
Even the Inspector, with his mind full of casks and corpses, could
not remain insensible of its charm. With a half sigh he thought of
that garden in the country which it was one of his dearest dreams
some day to achieve. The daffodils would now be in fine show and the
primroses would be on, and such a lot of fascinating work would be
waiting to be done among the later plants. . . .

The car drew up as he had arranged at the end of Goole Street and the
Inspector proceeded on foot. After a short walk he reached his
objective, an archway at the end of a block of buildings, above which
was a faded signboard bearing the legend, ‘John Lyons and Son,
Carriers.’ Passing under the arch and following a short lane, he
emerged in a yard with an open-fronted shed along one side and a
stable big enough for eight or nine horses on the other. Four or five
carts of different kinds were ranged under the shed roof. In the
middle of the open space, with a horse yoked in, was a dray with
brown sides, and Burnley, walking close to it, saw that under the
paint the faint outline of white letters could be traced. A youngish
man stood by the stable door and watched Burnley curiously, but
without speaking.

‘Boss about?’ shouted Burnley.

The youngish man pointed to the entrance.

‘In the office,’ he replied.

The Inspector turned and entered a small wooden building immediately
inside the gate. A stout, elderly man with a gray beard, who was
posting entries in a ledger, got up and came forward as he did so.

‘Morning,’ said Burnley, ‘have you a dray for hire?’

‘Why, yes,’ answered the stout man. ‘When do you want it and for how
long?’

‘It’s this way,’ returned Burnley. ‘I’m a painter, and I have always
stuff to get to and from jobs. My own dray has broken down and I want
one while it’s being repaired. I’ve asked a friend for the loan of
his, but he may not be able to supply. It will take about four days
to put it right.’

‘Then you wouldn’t want a horse and man?’

‘No, I should use my own.’

‘In that case, sir, I couldn’t agree, I fear. I never let my vehicles
out without a man in charge.’

‘You’re right in that, of course, but I don’t want the man. I’ll tell
you. If you let me have it I’ll make you a deposit of its full value.
That will guarantee its safe return.’

The stout man rubbed his cheek.

‘I might do that,’ he said. ‘I’ve never done anything like it before,
but I don’t see why I shouldn’t.’

‘Let’s have a look at it, anyway,’ said Burnley.

They went into the yard and approached the dray, Burnley going
through the form of examining it thoroughly.

‘I have a lot of small kegs to handle,’ he said, ‘as well as drums of
paint. I should like to have that barrel loader fixed till I see if
it’s narrow enough to carry them.’

The stout man unhooked the loader and fixed it in position.

‘Too wide, I’m afraid,’ said the Inspector, producing his rule. ‘I’ll
just measure it.’

It was fifteen inches wide and six feet six long. The sides were of
six by two material, with iron-shod ends. One pair of ends, that
resting on the ground, was chisel-pointed, the other carried the
irons for hooking it on to the cart. The ends of these irons made
rectangles about three inches by two. Burnley looked at the
rectangles. Both were marked with soil. He was satisfied. The loader
was what Watty had used to cross the wall.

‘That’ll do all right,’ he said. ‘Let’s see, do you carry a box for
hay or tools?’ He opened it and rapidly scanned its contents. There
was a halter, a nosebag, a small coil of rope, a cranked spanner, and
some other small objects. He picked up the spanner.

‘This, I suppose, is for the axle caps?’ he said, bending down and
trying it. ‘I see it fits the nuts.’ As he replaced it in the box he
took a quick look at the handle. It bore two sets of scratches on
opposite sides, and the Inspector felt positive these would fit the
marks on the padlock and staple of the coach-house door, had he been
able to try them.

The stout man was regarding him with some displeasure.

‘You weren’t thinking of buying it?’ he said.

‘No, thanks, but if you want a deposit before you let me take it, I
want to be sure it won’t sit down with me.’

They returned to the office, discussing rates. Finally these were
arranged, and it was settled that when Burnley had seen his friend he
was to telephone the result.

The Inspector left the yard well pleased. He had now complete proof
that his theories were correct and that Watty with that dray had
really stolen the cask.

Returning to Goole Street he called at the Post Office. It was ten
minutes to twelve, and there being no message for him he stood
waiting at the door. Five minutes had not elapsed before a street
arab appeared, looked him up and down several times, and then said:--

‘Name o’ Burnley?’

‘That’s me,’ returned the Inspector. ‘Got a note for me?’

‘The other cove said as ’ow you’ld give me a tanner.’

‘Here you are, sonny,’ said Burnley, and the sixpence and the note
changed owners. The latter read:--

‘Party just about to go home for dinner. Am waiting on road south of
carrier’s yard.’

Burnley walked to where he had left the motor and getting in, was
driven to the place mentioned. At a sign from him the driver drew the
car to the side of the road, stopping his engine at the same time.
Jumping down, he opened the bonnet and bent over the engine. Any one
looking on would have seen that a small breakdown had taken place.

A tall, untidy looking man, in threadbare clothes and smoking a short
clay, lounged up to the car with his hands in his pockets. Burnley
spoke softly without looking round,--

‘I want to arrest him, Hastings. Point him out when you see him.’

‘He’ll pass this way going for his dinner in less than five minutes.’

‘Right.’

The loafer moved forward and idly watched the repairs to the engine.
Suddenly he stepped back.

‘That’s him,’ he whispered.

Burnley looked out through the back window of the car and saw a
rather short, wiry man coming down the street, dressed in blue
dungarees and wearing a gray woollen muffler. As he reached the car,
the Inspector stepped quickly out and touched him on the shoulder,
while the loafer and the driver closed round.

‘Walter Palmer, I am an inspector from Scotland Yard. I arrest you on
a charge of stealing a cask. I warn you anything you say may be used
against you. Better come quietly, you see there are three of us.’

Before the dumbfounded man could realise what was happening, a pair
of handcuffs had snapped on his wrists and he was being pushed in the
direction of the car.

‘All right, boss, I’ll come,’ he said as he got in, followed by
Burnley and Hastings. The driver started his engine and the car
slipped quietly down the road. The whole affair had not occupied
twenty seconds and hardly one of the passers-by had realised what was
taking place.

‘I’m afraid, Palmer, this is a serious matter,’ began Burnley.
‘Stealing the cask is one thing, but breaking into a man’s yard at
night is another. That’s burglary and it will mean seven years at
least.’

‘I don’t know what you’re talking abaht, boss,’ answered the prisoner
hoarsely, licking his dry lips, ‘I don’t know of no cask.’

‘Now, man, don’t make things worse by lying. We know the whole thing.
Your only chance is to make a clean breast of it.’

Palmer’s face grew paler but he did not reply.

‘We know how you brought out the cask to Mr. Felix’s about eight
o’clock last night, and how, when you had left it there, you thought
you’d go back and see what chances there were of getting hold of it
again. We know how you hid the dray in a field close by, and then
went back down the lane and waited to see if anything would turn up.
We know how you learnt the house was empty and that after Mr. Felix
left you brought the dray back. We know all about your getting over
the wall with the barrel loader, and forcing the coach-house door
with the wheel-cap wrench. You see, we know the whole thing, so
there’s not the slightest use in your pretending ignorance.’

During this recital the prisoner’s face had grown paler and paler
until it was now ghastly. His jaw had dropped and great drops of
sweat rolled down his forehead. Still he said nothing.

Burnley saw he had produced his impression and leant forward and
tapped him on the shoulder.

‘Look here, Palmer,’ he said. ‘If you go into court nothing on earth
can save you. It’ll be penal servitude for at least five, and
probably seven, years. But I’m going to offer you a sporting chance
if you like to take it.’ The man’s eyes fixed themselves with painful
intentness on the speaker’s face. ‘The police can only act if Mr.
Felix prosecutes. But what Mr. Felix wants is the cask. If you return
the cask at once, unopened, Mr. Felix might--I don’t say he will--but
he might be induced to let you off. What do you say?’

At last the prisoner’s self-control went. He threw up his manacled
hands with a gesture of despair.

‘My Gawd!’ he cried hoarsely. ‘I can’t.’

The Inspector jumped.

‘Can’t?’ he cried sharply. ‘What’s that? Can’t? What do you mean?’

‘I don’t know where it is. I don’t, I swear. See ’ere, boss,’ the
words now poured out of his mouth in a rapid stream, ‘I’ll tell you
the truth, I will, swelp me Gawd. Listen to me.’

They had reached the City and were rapidly approaching Scotland Yard.
The Inspector gave instructions for the car to be turned and run
slowly through the quieter streets. Then he bent over to the now
almost frantic man.

‘Pull yourself together and tell me your story. Let’s have the whole
of it without keeping anything back, and remember the truth is your
only chance.’

Palmer’s statement, divested of its cockney slang and picturesque
embellishments was as follows:--

‘I suppose you know all about the way Mr. Felix hired the dray,’
began Palmer, ‘and painted it in the shed, and about my mate Jim
Brown and me?’ The Inspector nodded, and he continued: ‘Then I don’t
need to tell you all that part of it, only that Jim and I from the
first were suspicious that there was something crooked about the
whole business. Mr. Felix told us he had a bet on that he could get
the cask away without being caught, but we didn’t believe that, we
thought he was out to steal it. Then when he told us that stevedore
fellow was to be fixed so he couldn’t follow us, we were both quite
sure it was a do. Then you know how Felix and I left Jim and him in
the bar and went back to the shed and repainted the dray? You know
all that?’

‘I know,’ said Burnley.

‘We waited in the shed till it was getting on towards dusk, and then
we got the cask out to Felix’s, and left it swinging in a set of
chain blocks in an out-house. Well, sir, I asked more than twice the
pay he’d promised, and when he gave it without a word I was certain
he was afraid of me. I thought, “There’s some secret about that cask
and he’ld be willing to pay to have it kept quiet.” And then it
occurred to me that if I could get hold of it, I could charge him my
own price for its return. I didn’t mean to steal it. I didn’t, sir,
honest. I only meant to keep it for a day or two till he’d be willing
to pay a reward.’

The man paused.

‘Well, you know, Palmer, blackmail is not much better than theft,’
said Burnley.

‘I’m only telling you the truth, sir; that’s the way it was. I
thought I’d try and find out what part of the house Felix slept in
and if there were others about, so as to see what chances there’d be
of getting the dray up again without being heard, so I hid it in a
field as you know, and went up the lane. I don’t think I would have
done anything only for Felix going away and saying the house was
empty. Then it came over me so strongly how easy everything would be
with the coast clear and the cask swinging in the chain blocks. The
temptation was too strong for me, and I went back and got in as you
said. I suppose you must have been there all the time watching me?’

The Inspector did not reply, and Palmer went on:--

‘It happened that for some time I had been going to change my house.
There was an empty one close by I thought would suit. I’d got the key
on Saturday and looked over it on Sunday. The key was still in my
pocket, for I hadn’t had time to return it.

‘I intended to drive the dray down the lane behind this house and get
the cask off it, then run round and get in from the front, open the
yard door, roll the cask in, lock up again and return the dray to the
yard. I would make an excuse with the landlord to keep the key for a
day or two till I could get the money out of Felix.

‘Well, sir, I drove down the lane to the back of the house, and then
a thing happened that I’d never foreseen. I couldn’t get the cask
down. It was too heavy. I put my shoulder to it, and tried my utmost
to get it over on its side, but I couldn’t budge it.

‘I worked till the sweat was running down me, using anything I could
find for a lever, but it was no good, it wouldn’t move. I went over
all my friends in my mind to see if there was any one I could get to
help, but there was no one close by that I thought would come in, and
I was afraid to put myself in any one’s power that I wasn’t sure of.
I believed Jim would be all right, but he lived two miles away and I
did not want to go for him for I was late enough as it was.

‘In the end I could think of no other way, and I locked the house and
drove the dray to Jim’s. Here I met with another disappointment. Jim
had gone out about an hour before, and his wife didn’t know where he
was or when he’d be in.

‘I cursed my luck. I was ten times more anxious now to get rid of the
cask than I had been before to get hold of it. And then I thought I
saw a way out. I would drive back to the yard, leave the cask there
on the dray all night, get hold of Jim early in the morning, and with
his help take the cask back to the empty house. If any questions were
asked I would say Felix had given me instructions to leave it
overnight in the yard and deliver it next morning to a certain
address. I should hand over ten shillings and say he had sent this
for the job.

‘I drove to the yard, and then everything went wrong. First, the boss
was there himself, and in a vile temper. I didn’t know till
afterwards, but one of our carts had been run into by a motor-lorry
earlier in the evening and a lot of damage done and that had upset
him.

‘“What’s this thing you’ve got?” he said, when he saw the cask.

‘I told him, and added that Felix had asked me to take it on in the
morning, handing him the ten shillings.

‘“Where is it to go?” he asked.

‘Now this was a puzzler, for I hadn’t expected there’d be any one
there to ask questions and I had no answer ready. So I made up an
address. I chose a big street of shops and warehouses about four
miles away--too far for the boss to know much about it, and I tacked
on an imaginary number.

‘“133 Little George Street,” I answered.

‘The boss took a bit of chalk and wrote the address on the blackboard
we have for such notes. Then he turned back to the broken cart, and I
unyoked the horse from the dray and went home.

‘I was very annoyed by the turn things had taken, but I thought that
after all it would not make much difference having given the address.
I could go to the empty house in the morning as I had arranged.

‘I was early over at Jim’s next morning and told him the story. He
was real mad at first and cursed me for all kinds of a fool. I kept
on explaining how safe it was, for we were both sure Felix couldn’t
call in the police or make a fuss. At last he agreed to stand in with
me, and it was arranged that he would go direct to the empty house,
while I followed with the cask. He would explain his not turning up
at the yard by saying he was ill.

‘The boss was seldom in when we arrived, but he was there this
morning, and his temper was no better.

‘“Here, you,” he called, when he saw me, “I thought you were never
coming. Get the big gray yoked into the box cart and get away to this
address”--he handed me a paper--“to shift a piano.”

‘“But the cask,” I stammered.

‘“You mind your own business and do what you’re told. I’ve settled
about that.”

‘I looked round. The dray was gone, and whether he’d sent it back to
Felix or to the address I’d given, I didn’t know.

‘I cursed the whole affair bitterly, particularly when I thought of
Jim waiting at the house. But there was nothing I could do, and I
yoked the box cart and left. I went round by the house and told Jim,
and I never saw a madder man in all my life. I could make nothing of
him, so I left him and did the piano job. I just got back to the yard
and was going for dinner when you nabbed me.’

When the prisoner had mentioned the address in Little George Street,
Burnley had given a rapid order to the driver, and the statement had
only just been finished when the car turned into the street.

‘No. 133, you said?’

‘That’s it, sir.’

No. 133 was a large hardware shop. Burnley saw the proprietor.

‘Yes,’ the latter said, ‘we have the cask, and I may say I was very
annoyed with my foreman for taking it in without an advice note or
something in writing. You can have it at once on your satisfying me
you really are from Scotland Yard.’

His doubts were quickly set at rest, and he led the party to his yard.

‘Is that it, Palmer?’ asked Burnley.

‘That’s it, sir, right enough.’

‘Good. Hastings, you remain here with it till I send a dray. Get it
loaded up and see it yourself to the Yard. You can then go off duty.
You, Palmer, come with me.’

Re-entering the car, Burnley and his prisoner were driven to the same
destination, where the latter was handed over to another official.

‘If Mr. Felix will consent not to prosecute,’ said Burnley as the man
was being led off, ‘you’ll get out at once.’

The Inspector waited about till the dray arrived, and, when he had
seen with his own eyes that the cask was really there, he walked to
his accustomed restaurant and sat down to enjoy a long deferred meal.




CHAPTER VIII

THE OPENING OF THE CASK

It was getting on towards five when Inspector Burnley, like a giant
refreshed with wine, emerged once more upon the street. Calling a
taxi, he gave the address of St. Malo, Great North Road.

‘Now for friend Felix,’ he thought, as he lit a cigar. He was tired
and he lay back on the cushions, enjoying the relaxation as the car
slipped dexterously through the traffic. Familiar as he was with
every phase of London life, he never wearied of the panorama of the
streets, the ceaseless movement, the kaleidoscopic colours. The
sights of the pavement, the sound of pneus upon asphalt, the very
smell of burnt petrol--each appealed to him as part of the alluring
whole he loved.

They passed through the Haymarket and along Shaftesbury Avenue,
turned up Tottenham Court Road, and through Kentish Town out on the
Great North Road. Here the traffic was less dense and they made
better speed. Burnley removed his hat and allowed the cool air to
blow on his head. His case was going well. He was content.

Nearly an hour had passed before he rang the bell at St. Malo. Felix
opened the door, the visage of Sergeant Kelvin, his watchdog,
appearing in the gloom at the back of the hall.

‘What luck, Inspector?’ he cried, when he recognised his visitor.

‘We’ve got it, Mr. Felix. Found it a couple of hours ago. I’ve got a
taxi here, and, if convenient for you, we’ll go right in and open the
thing at once.’

‘Right. I’m sure I am ready.’

‘You come along too, Kelvin,’ said the Inspector to his subordinate,
and when Felix had got his hat and coat the three men walked up to
the taxi.

‘Scotland Yard,’ called Burnley, and the car swung round and started
citywards.

As they sped swiftly along, the Inspector gave an account of his day
to his companion. The latter was restless and excited, and admitted
he would be glad to get the business over. He was anxious about the
money, as it happened that a sum of £1000 would just enable him to
meet a mortgage, which otherwise would press rather heavily upon him.
Burnley looked up sharply when he heard this.

‘Did your French friend know that?’ he asked.

‘Le Gautier? No, I’m sure he did not.’

‘If you take my advice, Mr. Felix, you won’t count too much on the
cask. Indeed, you should prepare yourself for something unpleasant.’

‘What do you mean?’ exclaimed Felix. ‘You hinted that you thought the
cask contained something besides the money. What was it?’

‘I’m sorry I can’t answer you. The thing was only a suspicion, and we
shall learn the truth in so short a time it’s not worth discussion.’

Burnley having to make a call on some other business, they returned
by a different route, coming down to the river near London Bridge.
Already the day was drawing in, and yellow spots of light began to
gleam in the windows of the palace hotels, and from the murky
buildings on the south side. On the comparatively deserted Embankment
they made good speed, and Big Ben was chiming the quarter after seven
as they swung into the Yard.

‘I’ll see if the Chief’s in,’ said Burnley, as they reached his
office. ‘He wanted to see the cask opened.’

The great man was getting ready to go home, but decided to wait on
seeing the Inspector. He greeted Felix politely.

‘Singular set of circumstances, Mr. Felix,’ he said, as they shook
hands. ‘I trust they will remain only that.’

‘You’re all very mysterious about it,’ returned Felix. ‘I have been
trying to get a hint of the Inspector’s suspicions but he won’t
commit himself.’

‘We shall see now in a moment.’

Headed by Burnley, they passed along a corridor, down some steps and
through other passages, until they emerged in a small open yard
entirely surrounded by a high, window-pierced building. Apparently in
the daytime it acted as a light well, but now in the growing dusk it
was itself illuminated by a powerful arc lamp which threw an intense
beam over every part of the granolithic floor. In the centre stood
the cask, on end, with the damaged stave up.

The little group numbered five. There were the Chief, Felix, Burnley,
Sergeant Kelvin, and another nondescript looking man. Burnley stepped
forward.

‘This cask is so exceedingly strongly made,’ he said, ‘I’ve got a
carpenter to open it. I suppose he may begin?’

The Chief nodded, and the nondescript man advancing set to work and
soon lifted out the pieces of wood from the top. He held one up.

‘You see, gentlemen, it’s nearly two inches thick, more than twice as
heavy as an ordinary wine cask.’

‘That’ll do, carpenter. I’ll call you if I want you again,’ said
Burnley, and the man, touching his cap, promptly disappeared.

The four men drew closer. The cask was filled up to the top with
sawdust. Burnley began removing it, sifting it carefully through his
fingers.

‘Here’s the first,’ he said, as he laid a sovereign on the floor to
one side. ‘And another! And another!’

The sovereigns began to grow into a tiny pile.

‘There’s some very uneven-shaped thing here,’ he said again. ‘About
the centre the sawdust is not half an inch thick, but it goes down
deep round the sides. Lend a hand, Kelvin, but be careful and don’t
use force.’

The unpacking continued. Handful after handful of dust was taken out
and, after being sifted, was placed in a heap beside the sovereigns.
As they got deeper the operation became slower, the spaces from which
the tightly packed dust was removed growing narrower and harder to
get at. Fewer sovereigns were found, suggesting that these had been
placed at the top of the cask after the remainder of the contents had
been packed.

‘All the sawdust we can get at is out now,’ Burnley said presently,
and then, in a lower tone, ‘I’m afraid it’s a body. I’ve come on a
hand.’

‘A hand? A body?’ cried Felix, his face paling and an expression of
fear growing in his eyes. The Chief moved closer to him as the others
bent over the cask.

The two men worked silently for some moments and then Burnley spoke
again,--

‘Lift now. Carefully does it.’

They stooped again over the cask and, with a sudden effort lifted out
a paper-covered object and laid it reverently on the ground. A sharp
‘My God!’ burst from Felix, and even the case-hardened Chief drew in
his breath quickly.

It was the body of a woman, the head and shoulders being wrapped
round with sheets of brown paper. It lay all bunched together as it
had done in the cask. One dainty hand, with slim, tapered fingers
protruded from the paper, and stuck stiffly upwards beside the
rounded shoulder.

The men stopped and stood motionless looking down at the still form.
Felix was standing rigid, his face blanched, his eyes protruding,
horror stamped on his features. The Chief spoke in a low tone,--

‘Take off the paper.’

Burnley caught the loose corner and gently removed it. As it came
away the figure within became revealed to the onlookers.

The body was that of a youngish woman, elegantly clad in an evening
gown of pale pink cut low round the throat and shoulders, and trimmed
with old lace. Masses of dark hair were coiled round the small head.
On the fingers the glint of precious stones caught the light. The
feet were cased in silk stockings, but no shoes. Pinned to the dress
was an envelope.

But it was on the face and neck the gaze of the men was riveted. Once
she had clearly been beautiful, but now the face was terribly black
and swollen. The dark eyes were open and protruding, and held an
expression of deadly horror and fear. The lips were drawn back
showing the white, even teeth. And below, on the throat were two
discoloured bruises, side by side, round marks close to the windpipe,
thumb-prints of the animal who had squeezed out that life with
relentless and merciless hands.

When the paper was removed from the dead face, the eyes of Felix
seemed to start literally out of his head.

‘God!’ he shrieked in a thin, shrill tone. ‘It’s Annette!’ He stood
for a moment, waved his hands convulsively, and then, slowly turning,
pitched forward insensible on the floor.

The chief caught him before his head touched the ground.

‘Lend a hand here,’ he called.

Burnley and the sergeant sprang forward and, lifting the inanimate
form, bore it into an adjoining room and laid it gently on the floor.

‘Doctor,’ said the Chief shortly, and the sergeant hurried off.

‘Bad business, this,’ resumed the Chief. ‘He didn’t know what was
coming?’

‘I don’t think so, sir. My impression has been all through that he
was being fooled by this Frenchman, whoever he is.’

‘It’s murder now, anyway. You’ll have to go to Paris, Burnley, and
look into it.’

‘Yes, sir, very good.’ He looked at his watch. ‘It’s eight o’clock. I
shall hardly be able to go to-night. I shall have to take the cask
and the clothing, and get some photos and measurements of the corpse
and hear the result of the medical examination.’

‘To-morrow will be time enough, but I’d go by the nine o’clock train.
I’ll give you a personal note to Chauvet, the chief of the Paris
police. You speak French, I think?’

‘Enough to get on, sir.’

‘You shouldn’t have much difficulty, I think. The Paris men are bound
to know if there are any recent disappearances, and if not you have
the cask and the clothing to fall back on.’

‘Yes, sir, they should be a help.’

Footsteps in the corridor announced the arrival of the doctor. With a
hasty greeting to the Chief, he turned to the unconscious man.

‘What happened to him?’ he asked.

‘He has had a shock,’ answered the Chief, explaining in a few words
what had occurred.

‘He’ll have to be removed to hospital at once. Better get a
stretcher.’

The sergeant disappeared again and in a few seconds returned with the
apparatus and another man. Felix was lifted on to it and borne off.

‘Doctor,’ said the Chief, as the former was about to follow, ‘as soon
as you are through with him I wish you’ld make an examination of the
woman’s body. It seems fairly clear what happened to her, but it
would be better to have a post-mortem. Poison may have been used
also. Burnley, here, is going to Paris by the nine o’clock in the
morning to make inquiries, and he will want a copy of your report
with him.’

‘I shall have it ready,’ said the doctor as, with a bow, he hurried
after his patient.

‘Now, let’s have a look at that letter.’

They returned to the courtyard and Burnley unpinned the envelope from
the dead woman’s gown. It was unaddressed, but the Chief slit it open
and drew out a sheet of folded paper. It bore a single line of
typing:--


‘Your £50 loan returned herewith with £2 10s. 0d. interest.’


That was all. No date, address, salutation, or signature. Nothing to
indicate who had sent it, or whose was the body that had accompanied
it.

‘Allow me, sir,’ said Burnley.

He took the paper and scrutinised it carefully. Then he held it up to
the light.

‘This is from Le Gautier also,’ he continued. ‘See the watermark. It
is the same paper as Felix’s letter. Look also at the typing. Here
are the crooked n’s and r’s, the defective l’s and the t’s and e’s
below alignment. It was typed on the same machine.’

‘Looks like it certainly.’ Then, after a pause: ‘Come to my room for
that letter to M. Chauvet.’

They traversed the corridors and the Inspector got his introduction
to the Paris police. Then returning to the little yard, he began the
preparations for his journey.

First he picked up and counted the money. There was £31 10s. in
English gold and, having made a note of the amount, he slipped it
into his pocket as a precaution against chance passers-by. With the
£21 handed by Broughton to Mr. Avery, this made the £52 10s. referred
to in the typewritten slip. Then he had the body moved to the
dissecting-room and photographed from several points of view, after
which it was stripped by a female assistant. The clothes he went
through with great care, examining every inch of the material for
maker’s names, initials, or other marks. Only on the delicate cambric
handkerchief was his search rewarded, a small A. B. being embroidered
amid the tracery of one corner. Having attached a label to each
garment separately, as well as to the rings from the fingers and a
diamond comb from the luxuriant hair, he packed them carefully in a
small portmanteau, ready for transport to France.

Sending for the carpenter, he had the end boards of the cask
replaced, and the whole thing wrapped in sacking and corded.
Labelling it to himself at the Gare du Nord, he had it despatched to
Charing Cross with instructions to get it away without delay.

It was past ten when his preparations were complete, and he was not
sorry when he was free to go home to supper and bed.




PART II--PARIS




CHAPTER IX

M. LE CHEF DE LA SÛRETÉ

At 9.00 a.m. next morning the Continental express moved slowly out of
Charing Cross station, bearing in the corner of a first-class smoking
compartment, Inspector Burnley. The glorious weather of the past few
days had not held, and the sky was clouded over, giving a promise of
rain. The river showed dark and gloomy as they drew over it, and the
houses on the south side had resumed their normal dull and grimy
appearance. A gentle breeze blew from the south-west, and Burnley,
who was a bad sailor, hoped it would not be very much worse at Dover.
He lit one of his strong-smelling cigars and puffed at it
thoughtfully as the train ran with ever-increasing speed through the
extraordinary tangle of lines south of London Bridge.

He was glad to be taking this journey. He liked Paris and he had not
been there for four years, not indeed since the great Marcelle murder
case, which attracted so much attention in both countries. M.
Lefarge, the genial French detective with whom he had then
collaborated, had become a real friend and he hoped to run across him
again.

They had reached the outer suburbs and occasional fields began to
replace the lines of little villas which lie closer to the city. He
watched the flying objects idly for a few minutes, and then with a
little sigh turned his attention to his case, as a barrister makes up
his brief before going into court.

He considered first his object in making the journey. He had to find
out who the murdered woman was, if she was murdered, though there
appeared little doubt about that. He had to discover and get
convicting evidence against the murderer, and lastly, he had to learn
the explanation of the extraordinary business of the cask.

He then reviewed the data he already had, turning first to the
medical report which up till then he had not had an opportunity of
reading. There was first a note about Felix. That unhappy man was
entirely prostrated from the shock and his life was in serious danger.

The Inspector had already known this, for he had gone to the ward
before seven that morning in the hope of getting a statement from the
sick man, only to find him semi-conscious and delirious. The identity
of the dead woman could not, therefore, be ascertained from him. He,
Burnley, must rely on his own efforts.

The report then dealt with the woman. She was aged about
five-and-twenty, five feet seven in height and apparently gracefully
built, and weighing a little over eight stone. She had dark hair of
great length and luxuriance, and eyes with long lashes and delicately
pencilled brows. Her mouth was small and regular, her nose slightly
retroussé and her face a true oval. She had a broad, low forehead,
and her complexion appeared to have been very clear, though dark.
There was no distinguishing mark on the body.

‘Surely,’ thought Burnley, ‘with such a description it should be easy
to identify her.’

The report continued:--


‘There are ten marks about her neck, apparently finger marks. Of
these eight are together at the back of the neck and not strongly
marked. The remaining two are situated in front of the throat, close
together and one on each side of the windpipe. The skin at these
points is much bruised and blackened, and the pressure must therefore
have been very great.

‘It seemed clear the marks were caused by some individual standing in
front of her and squeezing her throat with both hands, the thumbs on
the windpipe and the fingers round the neck. From the strength
necessary to produce such bruises, it looks as if this individual
were a man.

‘An autopsy revealed the fact that all the organs were sound, and
there was no trace of poison or other cause of death. The conclusion
is therefore unavoidable that the woman was murdered by
strangulation. She appears to have been dead about a week or slightly
longer.’


‘That’s definite, anyway,’ mused Burnley. ‘Let’s see what else we
have.’

There was the woman’s rank in life. She was clearly well off if not
rich, and probably well born. Her fingers suggested culture; they
were those of the artist or musician. The wedding ring on her right
hand showed that she was married and living in France. ‘Surely,’
thought the Inspector again, ‘the Chief is right. It would be
impossible for a woman of this kind to disappear without the
knowledge of the French police. My job will be done when I have seen
them.’

But supposing they did not know. What then?

There was first of all the letter to Felix. The signatory, M. Le
Gautier, assuming such a man existed, should be able to give a clue.
The waiters in the Toisson d’Or Café might know something. The
typewriter with the defective letters was surely traceable.

The clothes in which the corpse was dressed suggested another line of
attack. Inquiry at the leading Paris shops could hardly fail to
produce information. And if not there were the rings and the diamond
comb. These would surely lead to something.

Then there was the cask. It was a specially made one, and must surely
have been used for a very special purpose. Inquiry from the firm
whose label it had borne could hardly be fruitless.

And lastly, if all these failed, there was left advertisement. A
judiciously worded notice with a reward for information of identity
would almost certainly draw. Burnley felt he was well supplied with
clues. Many and many a thorny problem he had solved with far less to
go on.

He continued turning the matter over in his mind in his slow,
painstaking way until a sudden plunge into a tunnel and a grinding of
brakes warned him they were coming into Dover.

The crossing was calm and uneventful. Before they passed between the
twin piers at Calais the sun had burst out, the clouds were thinning,
and blue sky showing in the distance.

They made a good run to Paris, stopping only at Amiens, and at 5.45
precisely drew slowly into the vast, echoing vault of the Gare du
Nord. Calling a taxi, the Inspector drove to a small private hotel he
usually patronised in the rue Castiglione. Having secured his room,
he re-entered the taxi and went to the Sûreté, the Scotland Yard of
Paris.

He inquired for M. Chauvet, sending in his letter of introduction.
The Chief was in and disengaged, and after a few minutes delay
Inspector Burnley was ushered into his presence.

M. Chauvet, Chef de la Sûreté, was a small, elderly man with a dark,
pointed beard, gold-rimmed glasses, and an exceedingly polite manner.

‘Sit down, Mr. Burnley,’ he said in excellent English, as they shook
hands. ‘I think we have had the pleasure of co-operating with you
before?’

Burnley reminded him of the Marcelle murder case.

‘Ah, of course, I remember. And now you are bringing us another of
the same kind. Is it not so?’

‘Yes, sir, and a rather puzzling one also. But I am in hopes we have
enough information to clear it up quickly.’

‘Good, I hope you have. Please let me have, in a word or two, the
briefest outline, then I shall ask you to go over it again in detail.’

Burnley complied, explaining in half a dozen sentences the gist of
the case.

‘The circumstances are certainly singular,’ said the Chief. ‘Let me
think whom I shall put in charge of it with you. Dupont is perhaps
the best man, but he is engaged on that burglary at Chartres.’ He
looked up a card index. ‘Of those disengaged, the best perhaps are
Cambon, Lefarge, and Bontemps. All good men.’

He stretched out his hand to the desk telephone.

‘Pardon me, sir,’ said Burnley. ‘I don’t want to make suggestions or
interfere in what is not my business, but I had the pleasure of
co-operating with M. Lefarge in the Marcelle case, and if it was
quite the same I should very much like to work with him again.’

‘But excellent, monsieur. I hear you say that with much pleasure.’

He lifted his desk telephone, pressing one of the many buttons on its
stand.

‘Ask M. Lefarge to come here at once.’

In a few seconds a tall, clean-shaven, rather English looking man
entered.

‘Ah, Lefarge,’ said the Chief. ‘Here is a friend of yours.’

The two detectives shook hands warmly.

‘He has brought us another murder mystery and very interesting it
sounds. Now, Mr. Burnley, perhaps you would let us hear your story in
detail.’

The Inspector nodded, and beginning at the sending of the clerk Tom
Broughton to check the consignment of wine at the Rouen steamer, he
related all the strange events that had taken place, the discovery of
the cask, and the suspicions aroused, the forged note, the removal of
the cask, the getting rid of Harkness, the tracing and second
disappearance of the cask, its ultimate recovery, its sinister
contents, and finally, a list of the points which might yield clues
if followed up. The two men listened intently, but without
interrupting. After he had finished they sat silently in thought.

‘In one point I do not quite follow you, Mr. Burnley,’ said the Chief
at last. ‘You appear to assume that this murdered woman was a
Parisienne. But what are your reasons for that?’

‘The cask came from Paris. That is certain, as you will see from the
steamship’s documents. Then the letter to Felix purports to be from a
Parisian, a M. Le Gautier, and both it and the note pinned to the
body were typed on French paper. Further, the label on the cask bore
the name of a Paris firm.’

‘It does not seem to me very conclusive. The cask admittedly came
from Paris, but might not Paris have been only the last stage of a
longer journey? How, for example, do we know that it was not from
London, or Brussels, or Berlin, in the first instance, and rebooked
at Paris with the object of laying a false scent? With regard to the
letter, I understand you did not see the envelope. Therefore it does
not seem to be evidence. As for the French paper, Felix had been
frequently in France, and he might be responsible for that. The
label, again, was a re-addressed old one. Might it not therefore have
been taken off some quite different package and put on the cask?’

‘I admit the evidence is far from conclusive, though it might be said
in answer to your first point about the re-addressing of the cask in
Paris, that such would involve a confederate here. In any case it
seemed to both our Chief and myself that Paris should be our first
point of inquiry.’

‘But yes, monsieur, in that I entirely agree. I only wished to make
the point that you have no real evidence that the solution of the
problem lies here.’

‘I’m afraid we have not.’

‘Well, to proceed. As you have suggested, the first point is to
ascertain if any one resembling the dead woman has disappeared
recently. Your doctor says that she has been dead for a week or
longer, but I do not think that we can confine our inquiries to that
period only. She might have been kidnapped and held a prisoner for a
considerable time previous to her death. I should say that it is not
likely, but it may have happened.’

He lifted his telephone, pressing another button.

‘Bring me the list of disappearances of persons in the Paris area
during the last four weeks, or rather’--he stopped and looked at the
others--‘the disappearances in all France for the same period.’

In a few seconds a clerk entered with some papers.

‘Here are all the disappearances reported during March, monsieur,’ he
said, ‘and here those for April up to the present date. I haven’t a
return for the last four weeks only, but can get one out at once if
you wish.’

‘No. These are all right.’

The Chief examined the documents.

‘Last month,’ he said, ‘seven persons disappeared of whom six were
women, four being in the Paris area. This month two people have
disappeared, both women and both in the Paris area. That is six women
in Paris in the last five weeks. Let’s see, now,’ he ran his fingers
down the column, ‘Suzanne Lemaître, aged seventeen, last seen--well,
it could not be she. Lucille Marquet, aged twenty--no good either.
All these are girls under twenty-one, except one. Here, what is this?
Marie Lachaise, aged thirty-four, height 172 centimetres--that is
about five feet eight in English measure--dark hair and eyes and
clear complexion, wife of M. Henri Lachaise, the avocat, of 41 rue
Tinques, Boulevarde Arago. Left home on the twenty-ninth ultimo, that
is about ten days ago, at three o’clock, ostensibly for shopping. Has
not been heard of since. Better take a note of that.’

M. Lefarge did so, and spoke for the first time.

‘We shall try it, of course, monsieur, but I don’t expect much
result. If that woman went out to shop she would hardly be wearing
evening dress, as was the corpse.’

‘Also,’ said Burnley, ‘I think we may take it the dead woman’s name
was Annette B.’

‘Probably you are both right. Still, you had better make sure.’

The Chief tossed away the papers and looked at Burnley.

‘No other disappearances have been reported, nor have we any further
information here that would seem to help. I am afraid we must fall
back on our other clues. Let us consider, therefore, where we should
start.’

He paused for a few moments and then resumed.

‘We may begin, I think, by checking the part of Felix’s statement
which you, Mr. Burnley, have not yet been able to inquire into, and
to do so we must interview M. Le Gautier and try to ascertain if he
wrote the letter. If he admits it we will be a step farther on, if
not, we must find out how far the story of the lottery and the bet is
true, and whether the conversation described by Felix actually took
place. In this case we must ascertain precisely who were present and
overheard that conversation, and would therefore have the knowledge
necessary to write that letter. If this does not give us what we
want, it may be necessary to follow up each of these persons and try
for our man by elimination. A part of that inquiry would be a search
for the typewriter used, which, as Mr. Burnley points out, is
identifiable. Simultaneously, I think we should endeavour to trace
the wearing apparel and the cask. What do you think of that,
gentlemen, for a rough programme?’

‘I don’t think we could do better, sir,’ returned Burnley as the
Chief looked at him, while Lefarge nodded his approval.

‘Very well, I would suggest that you and Lefarge go into the matter
of the letter to-morrow. Arrange your programme as you think best for
yourselves and keep me advised of how you get on. And now as to the
clothes. Let me see exactly what you have.’

Burnley spread out the dead woman’s clothes and jewellery on a table.
The Chief examined them for some minutes in silence.

‘Better separate them into three lots,’ he said at length, ‘the
dress, the underclothes, and the trinkets. It will take three to work
it properly.’ He consulted his card index and picked up the telephone.

‘Send Mme. Furnier and Mlles. Lecoq and Blaise here.’

In a few seconds three stylishly dressed women entered. The Chief
introduced Burnley and briefly explained the case.

‘I want you three ladies,’ he said, ‘to take one each of these three
lots of clothes and trinkets, and find the purchaser. Their quality
will give you an idea of the shops to try. Get at it first thing
to-morrow, and keep yourselves in constant touch with headquarters.’

When the women had withdrawn with the articles he turned to Burnley,--

‘In an inquiry of this sort I like a report in the evenings of
progress during the day. Perhaps you and Lefarge wouldn’t mind
calling about nine to-morrow evening, when we shall have a further
discussion. And now it is nearly eight o’clock, so you cannot do
anything to-night. You, Mr. Burnley, are doubtless tired from your
journey and will be glad to get to your hotel. So good-night,
gentlemen.’

The detectives bowed themselves out. After an exchange of further
greetings and compliments, Lefarge said:--

‘Are you really very tired? Are you game for a short inquiry
to-night?’

‘Why, certainly. What do you propose?’

‘This. Let us cross and get some dinner at Jules’ in the Boule Miche.
It’s on the way to that address the Chief gave us. Then we could go
on and see whether the body you found in the cask can be identified
as that of Madame Marie Lachaise.’

They strolled leisurely over the Pont St. Michel and crossed the Quai
into the Boulevard. When Burnley was in London he swore there was no
place like that city, but in Paris he never felt so sure. Jove! he
was glad to be back. And what luck to have met this good fellow
Lefarge again! He felt that in the intervals of business he was going
to enjoy himself.

They dined inexpensively but well, sitting over their cigars and
liqueur coffee until the clocks struck nine. Then Lefarge made a move.

‘I don’t like to go to this place too late,’ he said. ‘Do you mind
coming now?’

They took a taxi and, leaving the Luxembourg behind on the left,
quickly ran the mile or so to the Boulevard Arago. M. Lachaise
received them at once and they stated their melancholy business,
showing the photograph of the body. The avocat took it to the light
and examined it earnestly. Then he returned it with a gesture of
relief.

‘Thank God,’ he said at length, ‘it’s not she.’

‘The body was clothed in a light pink evening dress, with several
diamond rings on the fingers and a diamond comb in the hair.’

‘It is not she at all. My wife had no pink dress, nor did she wear a
diamond comb. Besides, she left here in an out-of-door walking dress
and all her evening things were in her wardrobe.’

‘It is conclusive,’ said M. Lefarge, and with thanks and compliments
they took their leave.

‘I thought that would be no good,’ said Lefarge, ‘but we must do what
the Chief says.’

‘Of course. Besides, you never know. Look here, old man,’ he added,
‘I am tired after all. I think, if you don’t mind, I’ll get away to
the hotel.’

‘But, of course. Whatever you feel like. Let’s stroll to the end of
the Boulevard. We can get the Metro across the street at the Avenue
d’Orléans.’

They changed at Châtelet and, having arranged to meet next morning,
the Inspector took the Maillot train for Concorde, while Lefarge went
in the opposite direction to his home near the Place de la Bastille.




CHAPTER X

WHO WROTE THE LETTER?

At ten o’clock next morning Lefarge called for Burnley at the
latter’s hotel in the rue Castiglione.

‘Now for M. Alphonse Le Gautier, the wine merchant,’ said the former
as he hailed a taxi.

A short drive brought them to the rue de Vallorbes, off the Avenue
Friedland, and there they discovered that the gentleman they were in
search of was no myth, but a creature of real flesh and blood. He
occupied a flat on the first floor of a big corner house, and the
spacious approach and elegant furnishing indicated that he was a man
of culture and comparative wealth. He had gone, they were told, to
his office in the rue Henri Quatre, and thither the two friends
followed him. He was a man of about five-and-thirty, with jet black
hair and a pale, hawk-like face, and his manner was nervous and alert.

‘We have called, monsieur,’ said Lefarge, when the detectives had
introduced themselves, ‘at the instance of M. le Chef de la Sûreté,
to ask your assistance in a small inquiry we are making. We want to
trace the movements of a gentleman who is perhaps not unknown to you,
a M. Léon Felix, of London.’

‘Léon Felix? Why, of course I know him. And what has he been up to?’

‘Nothing contrary to the law, monsieur,’ returned Lefarge with a
smile, ‘or, at least, we believe not. But unfortunately, in the
course of another inquiry a point has arisen which makes it necessary
for us to check some statements he has made about his recent actions.
It is in this we want your help.’

‘I don’t think I can tell you much about him, but any questions you
ask I’ll try to answer.’

‘Thank you, M. Le Gautier. Not to waste your time, then, I’ll begin
without further preface. When did you last meet M. Felix?’

‘Well, it happens I can tell you that, for I had a special reason to
note the date.’ He referred to a small pocket diary. ‘It was on
Sunday the 14th of March, four weeks ago next Sunday.’

‘And what was the special reason to which you refer?’

‘This. On that day M. Felix and I made an arrangement to purchase
coupons in the Government lotteries. He handed me 500 francs as his
share, and I was to add another 500 francs and put the business
through. Naturally I noted the transaction in my engagement book.’

‘Can you tell me under what circumstances this arrangement came to be
made?’

‘Certainly. It was the result of an otherwise idle conversation on
the lottery system, which took place that afternoon between a number
of men, of whom I was one, at the Café Toisson d’Or, in the rue
Royale. At the close of the discussion I said I would try my luck. I
asked Felix to join me, and he did so.’

‘And did you purchase the bonds?’

‘I did. I wrote enclosing a cheque that same evening.’

‘And I hope your speculation turned out successfully?’

M. Le Gautier smiled.

‘Well, I can hardly tell you that, you know. The drawing will not be
made till next Thursday.’

‘Next Thursday? Then I can only hope you will have luck. Did you
write M. Felix that you had actually moved in the matter?’

‘No, I took it, that went without saying.’

‘So that you have not communicated with M. Felix in any way since
last Sunday three weeks?’

‘That is so.’

‘I see. Now, another point, M. Le Gautier. Are you acquainted with a
M. Dumarchez, a stockbroker, whose office is in the Boulevard
Poissonière?’

‘I am. As a matter of fact he also was present at the discussion
about the lotteries.’

‘And since that discussion you made a certain bet with him?’

‘A bet?’ M. Le Gautier looked up sharply. ‘I don’t understand you. I
made no bet.’

‘Do you remember having a discussion with M. Dumarchez about
criminals pitting their wits against the police?’

‘No, I recollect nothing of the kind.’

‘Are you prepared, monsieur, to say that no such conversation took
place?’

‘Certainly, I do say it. And I should very much like to know the
purport of all these questions.’

‘I am sorry, monsieur, for troubling you with them, and I can assure
you they are not idle. The matter is a serious one, though I am not
at liberty to explain it fully at present. But if you will bear with
me I would like to ask one or two other things. Can you let me have
the names of those present at the Toisson d’Or when the conversation
about the lotteries took place?’

M. Le Gautier remained silent for some moments.

‘I hardly think I can,’ he said at last. ‘You see, there was quite a
fair sized group. Besides Felix, Dumarchez, and myself, I can
recollect M. Henri Briant and M. Henri Boisson. I think there were
others, but I cannot recall who they were.’

‘Was a M. Daubigny one of them?’

‘You are right. I had forgotten him. He was there.’

‘And M. Jaques Rôget?’

‘I’m not sure.’ M. Le Gautier hesitated again. ‘I think so, but I’m
not really sure.’

‘Can you let me have the addresses of these gentlemen?’

‘Some of them. M. Dumarchez lives five doors from me in the rue de
Vallorbes. M. Briant lives near the end of the rue Washington, where
it turns into the Champs Elysées. The other addresses I cannot tell
you off-hand, but I can help you to find them in a directory.’

‘Many thanks. Now, please excuse me for going back a moment. You gave
me to understand you did not write to M. Felix on the subject of the
lottery?’

‘Yes, I said so, I think, quite clearly.’

‘But M. Felix states the very opposite. He says he received a letter
from you, dated Thursday, 1st April, that is this day week.’

M. Le Gautier stared.

‘What’s that you say? He says he heard from me? There must be a
mistake there, monsieur, for I did not write to him.’

‘But he showed me the letter.’

‘Impossible, monsieur. He could not have shown you what did not
exist. Whatever letter he may have shown you was not from me. I
should like to see it. Have you got it there?’

For answer Lefarge held out the sheet which Felix had given to
Burnley during their midnight conversation at the villa of St. Malo.
As M. Le Gautier read it the look of wonder on his expressive face
deepened.

‘Extraordinary!’ he cried, ‘but here is a mystery! I never wrote, or
sent, or had any knowledge of such a letter. It’s not only a forgery,
but it’s a pure invention. There’s not a word of truth in that story
of the bet and the cask from beginning to end. Tell me something more
about it. Where did you get it?’

‘From M. Felix himself. He gave it to Mr. Burnley here, saying it was
from you.’

‘But, good heavens!’ the young man sprang to his feet and began
pacing up and down the room, ‘I can’t understand that. Felix is a
decent fellow, and he wouldn’t say it was from me if he didn’t
believe it. But how could he believe it? The thing is absurd.’ He
paused and then continued. ‘You say, monsieur, that Felix said this
note was from me. But what made him think so? There’s not a scrap of
writing about it. It isn’t even signed. He must have known any one
could write a letter and type my name below it. And then, how could
he suppose that I should write such a tissue of falsehoods.’

‘But that is just the difficulty,’ returned Lefarge. ‘It’s not so
false as you seem to imagine. The description of the conversation
about the lottery and your arrangement with Felix to purchase bonds
is, by your own admission, true.’

‘Yes, that part is, but the rest, all that about a bet and a cask, is
wholly false.’

‘But there I fear you are mistaken also, monsieur. The part about the
cask is apparently true. At least the cask arrived, addressed as
described, and on the day mentioned.’

Again the young merchant gave an exclamation of astonishment.

‘The cask arrived?’ he cried. ‘Then there really was a cask?’ He
paused again. ‘Well, I cannot understand it, but I can only repeat
that I never wrote that letter, nor have I the slightest idea of what
it is all about.’

‘It is, of course, obvious, monsieur, as you point out, that any one
could have typed a letter ending with your name. But you will admit
it is equally obvious that only a person who knew of your entering
the lottery could have written it. You tell us you are not that
person, and we fully accept your statement. Who else then, M. Le
Gautier, had this information?’

‘As far as that goes, any one who was present at the discussion at
the Toisson d’Or.’

‘Quite so. Hence you will see the importance of my questions as to
who these were.’

M. Le Gautier paced slowly up and down the room, evidently thinking
deeply.

‘I don’t know that I do,’ he said at last. ‘Suppose everything in
that letter was true. Suppose, for argument’s sake, I had written it.
What then? What business of the police is it? I can’t see that the
law has been broken.’

Lefarge smiled.

‘That ought to be clear enough, anyway. Look at the facts. A cask
arrives in London by the I. and C. boat from Rouen, labelled to a man
named Felix at the certain address. Inquiries show that no one of
that name lives at that address. Further, the cask is labelled
“Statuary,” but examination shows that it does not contain statuary,
but money, sovereigns. Then a man representing himself as Felix
appears, states he lives at the false address, which is untrue, says
he is expecting by that boat a cask of statuary, which is also
untrue, and claims the one in question. The steamer people, being
naturally suspicious, will not give it up, but by a trick Felix gets
hold of it, and takes it to quite another address. When questioned by
the police he produces this letter to account for his actions. I do
not think it surprising that we are anxious to learn who wrote the
letter, and if its contents are true.’

‘No, no, of course it is reasonable. I did not understand the
sequence of events. All the same, it is the most extraordinary
business I ever heard of.’

‘It is strange, certainly. Tell me, M. Le Gautier, have you ever had
any disagreement with Mr. Felix? Can you imagine him having, or
thinking he had, any cause of offence against you?’

‘Nothing of the kind.’

‘You never gave him cause, however innocently, to feel jealousy?’

‘Never. But why do you ask?’

‘I was wondering whether he might not have played a trick on you, and
have written the letter himself.’

‘No, no. I’m sure it’s not that. Felix is a very straight, decent
fellow. He would not do a thing like that.’

‘Well, can you think of any one who might be glad to give you
annoyance? What about the men who were present when you discussed the
lottery? Or any one else at all?’

‘I cannot think of a single person.’

‘Did you tell any one about this matter of the lottery?’

‘No. I never mentioned it.’

‘One other question, monsieur, and I have done. Did you at any time
borrow £50 or the equivalent of French money from M. Felix.’

‘I never borrowed from him at all.’

‘Or do you know any one who borrowed such a sum from him?’

‘No one, monsieur.’

‘Then, monsieur, allow me to express my regret for the annoyance
given, and my thanks for your courteous replies to my questions.’ He
flashed a glance at Burnley. ‘If we might still further inflict
ourselves on you, I should like, with your permission, to ask M.
Dumarchez to join us here so that we may talk the matter over
together.’

‘An excellent idea, monsieur. Do so by all means.’

One of the eventualities the colleagues had discussed before starting
their morning’s work was the possible denial by M. Le Gautier of any
bet with M. Dumarchez. They had decided that in such a case the
latter must be interrogated before a communication could reach him
from Le Gautier. It was with this in view that Lefarge left his
friend with the wine-merchant, while going himself to interview his
neighbour.

As the detective reached the door of the stockbroker’s office in the
Boulevard Poissonière it opened and a middle-aged gentleman with a
long, fair beard emerged.

‘Pardon, but are you M. Dumarchez?’ asked Lefarge.

‘My name, monsieur. Did you wish to see me?’

The detective introduced himself, and briefly stated his business.

‘Come in, monsieur,’ said the other. ‘I have an appointment in
another part of Paris shortly, but I can give you ten minutes.’ He
led the way into his private room and waved his visitor to a chair.

‘It is the matter of the bet, monsieur,’ began Lefarge. ‘The test has
failed, and the police have therefore to satisfy themselves that the
cask was really sent with the object stated.’

M. Dumarchez stared.

‘I do not understand,’ he replied. ‘To what bet are you referring?’

‘To the bet between you and M. Le Gautier. You see, M. Felix’s
dealings with the cask are the result of the bet, and it must be
obvious to you that confirmation of his statement is required.’

The stockbroker shook his head with decision as if to close the
conversation.

‘You have made some mistake, monsieur. I made no bet with M. Le
Gautier and, for the rest, I have no idea what you are speaking of.’

‘But, monsieur, M. Felix stated directly that you had bet M. Le
Gautier he could not get the cask away. If that is not true, it may
be serious for him.’

‘I know nothing of any cask. What Felix are you referring to?’

‘M. Léon Felix, of St. Malo, London.’

A look of interest passed over the stockbroker’s face.

‘Léon Felix? I certainly know him. A decent fellow he is too. And you
mean to say he told you I was mixed up with some matter connected
with a cask?’

‘Certainly. At least he told my colleague, Mr. Burnley, of the London
police.’

‘My dear monsieur, your colleague must be dreaming. Felix must have
been speaking of some one else.’

‘I assure you not, monsieur. There is no mistake. M. Felix states the
bet arose out of a conversation on the State lotteries, which took
place in the Café Toisson d’Or, three weeks ago last Sunday, at which
you were present.’

‘He is right about the conversation, anyway. I recollect that quite
well, but I know nothing whatever of any bet. Certainly, I made none.’

‘In that case, monsieur, I have to offer my apologies for having
troubled you. I can see a mistake has been made. But before I leave,
perhaps you would have the kindness to tell me who else were present
on that occasion. Probably I should have gone to one of them.’

After some consideration M. Dumarchez mentioned three names, all of
which Lefarge already had in his notebook. Then excusing himself on
the ground of his appointment, the stockbroker hurried away, while
Lefarge returned to report to Burnley and M. Le Gautier.

During the afternoon the colleagues called on each of the men whose
names they had been given as having been present at the Café Toisson
d’Or when the lottery discussion took place. M. Briant had gone to
Italy, but they saw the others, and in each case the result was the
same. All remembered the conversation, but none knew anything of the
bet or the cask. Inquiries from the waiters at the Toisson d’Or
likewise were without result.

‘We don’t seem to get much forrader,’ remarked Burnley, as the two
friends sat over their coffee after dinner that evening. ‘I am
inclined to believe that these men we have seen really don’t know
anything about the cask.’

‘I agree with you,’ returned Lefarge. ‘At any rate it shouldn’t be
difficult to test at least part of their statements. We can find out
from the lottery people whether Le Gautier did purchase 1000 francs
worth of bonds on Sunday three weeks. If he did, I think we must take
it that the story of the conversation in the Toisson d’Or is true,
and that he and Felix did agree to go in for it jointly.’

‘There can be no reasonable doubt of that.’

‘Further, we can find out if the drawing takes place next Thursday.
If it does, it follows that all that part of the letter about the
winning of the money and the test with the cask is false. If, on the
other hand, it has already been made, the letter may conceivably be
true, and Le Gautier is lying. But I don’t think that likely.’

‘Nor I. But I don’t quite agree with you about the letter. We already
know the letter is false. It said £988 would be sent in the cask,
whereas there was a body and £52 10s. But the question of the test is
not so clear to me. The cask _did_ come as described in the letter,
bearing the false address and description, and if it was not so sent
for the reason mentioned, what other reason can you suggest?’

‘None, I admit.’

‘Let us see, then, just what we do know about the writer of the
letter. Firstly, he must have known of the conversation about the
lottery, and of the arrangement made by Felix and Le Gautier to enter
for it. That is to say, he must either have been present in the
Toisson d’Or when it took place, or some one who was there must have
repeated it to him. Secondly, he must have known all the
circumstances of the sending out of the cask, at least as far as the
false address and description were concerned. Thirdly, he must have
had access to a rather worn typewriter, which we believe could be
identified, and fourthly, he must have possessed, or been able to
procure French note paper. So much is certain. We may also assume,
though it has neither been proved, nor is it very important, that he
could use the typewriter himself, as it is unlikely that such a
letter would be done by a typist from dictation.’

‘That’s true, and so far as I can see, the only man that fills the
bill so far is Felix himself.’

‘I don’t think it was Felix. I believe he was telling the truth all
right. But we haven’t enough information yet to judge. Perhaps when
we follow up the cask we shall be able to connect some of these men
we saw to-day with it.’

‘Possibly enough,’ answered Lefarge, rising. ‘If we are to get to the
Sûreté by nine, we had better go.’

‘Is it your Chief’s habit to hold meetings at nine o’clock? It seems
a curious time to me.’

‘And he’s a curious man, too. First rate at his job, you know, and
decent, and all that. But peculiar. He goes away in the afternoons,
and comes back after dinner and works half the night. He says he gets
more peace then?’

‘I dare say he does, but it’s a rum notion for all that.’

M. Chauvet listened with close attention to the report of the day’s
proceedings and, after Lefarge ceased speaking, sat motionless for
several seconds, buried in thought. Then, like a man who arrives at a
decision he spoke:--

‘The matter, so far as we have gone, seems to resolve itself into
these points. First, did a conversation about the lotteries take
place in the Café Toisson d’Or about four weeks ago? I think we may
assume that it did. Second, did Felix and Le Gautier agree to enter,
and if so, did Le Gautier send a cheque that day? Here we can get
confirmation by making inquiries at the lottery offices, and I will
send a man there to-morrow. Third, has the drawing taken place? This
can be ascertained in the same way. Beyond that, I do not think we
can go at present, and I am of opinion our next move should be to try
and trace the cask. That line of inquiry may lead us back to one of
these gentlemen you have seen to-day, or may point to some one else
whom we may find was present at the Toisson d’Or. What do you think,
gentlemen?’

‘We had both arrived at the same conclusion, monsieur,’ answered
Lefarge.

‘Well then, you will make inquiries about the cask to-morrow, will
you? Good. I will look-out for you in the evening.’

Having arranged eight o’clock at the Gare du Nord for the rendezvous
next day, the detectives bid each other good-night and went their
ways.




CHAPTER XI

MM. DUPIERRE ET CIE.

The hands of the large clock at the Gare du Nord were pointing to
three minutes before eight next morning as Inspector Burnley walked
up the steps of the entrance. Lefarge was there before him and the
two men greeted each other warmly.

‘I have a police box cart here,’ said Lefarge. ‘Give me your papers
and we’ll have the cask out in a brace of shakes.’

Burnley handed them over and they went to the luggage bureau.
Lefarge’s card had a magical effect, and in a very few minutes the
sacking-covered barrel had been found and loaded on to the cart.
Lefarge instructed the driver.

‘I want that taken to a street off the rue de la Convention at
Grenelle. You might start now and stop at the Grenelle end of the
Pont Mirabeau. Wait there until I come for you. I suppose it will
take you an hour or more?’

‘It’ll take more than an hour and a half, monsieur,’ replied the man.
‘It is a long way and this cart is very heavy.’

‘Very well, just do the best you can.’

The man touched his cap and moved off with his load.

‘Are we in any hurry?’ asked Burnley.

‘No, we have to kill time until he gets there. Why do you ask?’

‘Nothing, except that if we have time enough, let’s go down directly
to the river and take a boat. I always enjoy the Seine boats.’

‘As a matter of fact so do I,’ replied Lefarge. ‘You get the air and
the motion is pleasanter and more silent than a bus. They are not so
slow either when you consider the stops.’

They took a bus which brought them southwards through the Louvre,
and, alighting at the Pont des Arts, caught a steamer going to
Suresnes. The morning was fresh and exquisitely clear. The sun,
immediately behind them at first, crept slowly round to the left as
they followed the curve of the river. Burnley sat admiring perhaps
for the fiftieth time the graceful architecture of the bridges,
justly celebrated as the finest of any city in the world. He gazed
with fresh interest and pleasure also on the buildings they were
carried past, from the huge pile of the Louvre on the right bank to
the great terrace of the Quai d’Orsay on the left, and from the
Trocadero and the palaces of the Champs Élysées back to the thin
tapering shaft of the Eiffel Tower. How well he remembered a visit
that he and Lefarge had paid to the restaurant on the lower stage of
this latter when they lunched at the next table to Madame Marcelle,
the young and attractive looking woman who had murdered her English
husband by repeated doses of a slow and irritant poison. He had just
turned to remind his companion of the circumstance when the latter’s
voice broke in on his thoughts.

‘I went back to the Sûreté after we parted last night. I thought it
better to make sure of the cart this morning, and I also looked up
our records about this firm of monumental sculptors. It seems that it
is not a very large concern, and all the power is vested in the hands
of M. Paul Thévenet, the managing director. It is an old
establishment and apparently eminently respectable, and has a
perfectly clean record so far as we are concerned.’

‘Well, that’s so much to the good.’

They disembarked at the Pont Mirabeau and, crossing to the south side
and finding a tolerably decent looking café, sat down at one of the
little tables on the pavement behind a screen of shrubs in pots.

‘We can see the end of the bridge from here, so we may wait
comfortably until the cart appears,’ said Lefarge, when he had
ordered a couple of bocks.

They sat on in the pleasant sun, smoking and reading the morning
papers. Nearly an hour passed before the cart came into view slowly
crossing the bridge. Then they left their places at the café and,
signing to the driver to follow, walked down the rue de la
Convention, and turned into the rue Provence. Nearly opposite, a
little way down the street, was the place of which they were in
search.

Its frontage ran the whole length of the second block, and consisted
partly of a rather ancient looking four-story factory or warehouse
and partly of a high wall, evidently surrounding a yard. At the end
of the building this wall was pierced by a gateway leading into the
yard, and just inside was a door in the end wall of the building,
labelled ‘Bureau.’

Having instructed the driver to wait outside the gate, they pushed
open the small door and asked to see M. Thévenet on private business.
After a delay of a few minutes a clerk ushered them into his room.

The managing director was an elderly man, small and rather wizened,
with a white moustache, and a dry but courteous manner. He rose as
the detectives entered, wished them good-morning, and asked what he
could do for them.

‘I must apologise for not sending in my card, M. Thévenet,’ began
Lefarge, presenting it, ‘but, as the matter in question is somewhat
delicate, I preferred that your staff should not know my profession.’

M. Thévenet bowed.

‘This, sir,’ went on Lefarge, ‘is my colleague, Mr. Burnley of the
London police, and he is anxious for some information, if you would
be so kind as to let him have it.’

‘I will be pleased to answer any questions I can. I speak English if
Mr. Burnley would prefer it.’

‘I thank you,’ said Burnley. ‘The matter is rather a serious one. It
is briefly this. On Monday last--four days ago--a cask arrived in
London from Paris. Some circumstances with which I need not trouble
you aroused the suspicions of the police, with the result that the
cask was seized and opened. In it were found, packed in sawdust, two
things, firstly, £52 10s. in English gold, and secondly the body of a
youngish woman, evidently of good position, and evidently murdered by
being throttled by a pair of human hands.’

‘Horrible!’ ejaculated the little man.

‘The cask was of very peculiar construction, the woodwork being at
least twice as heavy as that of an ordinary wine cask and secured by
strong iron bands. And, sir, the point that has brought us to you is
that your firm’s name was stencilled on it after the words “Return
to,” and it was addressed on one of your firm’s labels.’

The little man sprang to his feet.

‘Our cask? Our label?’ he cried, in evident astonishment. ‘Do I
understand you to say, sir, that the cask containing this body was
sent out by us?’

‘No, sir,’ returned Burnley, ‘I did not say that. I simply say that
it arrived bearing your name and label. I am in total ignorance of
how or when the body was put in. That is what I am over from London
to investigate.’

‘But the thing is utterly incredible,’ said M. Thévenet, pacing up
and down the room. ‘No, no,’ he added, with a wave of his hand as
Burnley would have spoken, ‘I don’t mean that I doubt your word. But
I cannot but feel that there must be a terrible mistake.’

‘It is only right to add, sir,’ continued Burnley, ‘that I did not
myself see the label. But it was seen by the men of the carrying
company, and especially by one of their clerks who examined it
carefully after suspicion had been aroused. The label was afterwards
destroyed by Felix, to whom the cask was addressed.’

‘Felix, Felix, the name seems familiar. What was the full name and
address?’

‘M. Léon Felix, 141 West Judd Street, Tottenham Court Road, London,
W.C.’

‘Ah, of course,’ rejoined M. Thévenet. ‘There is, then, really such a
man? I rather doubted it at the time, you know, for our advice card
of the despatch of the cask was returned marked, “Not known,” and I
then looked him up in the London directory and could not find him. Of
course, as far as we were concerned, we had the money and it did not
matter to us.’

Burnley and his colleague sat up sharply.

‘I beg your pardon, M. Thévenet,’ said Burnley. ‘What’s that you say?
At the time? At what time, if you please?’

‘Why, when we sent out the cask. When else?’ returned the director,
looking keenly at his questioner.

‘But, I don’t understand. You _did_ send out a cask then, addressed
to Felix at Tottenham Court Road?’

‘Of course we did. We had the money, and why should we not do so?’

‘Look here, M. Thévenet,’ continued Burnley, ‘we are evidently
talking at cross purposes. Let me first explain more fully about the
label. According to our information, which we have no reason to
doubt, the address space had been neatly cut out and another piece of
paper pasted behind, bearing the address in question. It seemed to us
therefore, that some person had received the cask from you and,
having altered the label, packed the body in it and sent it on. Now
we are to understand that the cask was sent out by you. Why then
should the label have been altered?’

‘I’m sure I cannot tell.’

‘May I ask what was in the cask when it left here?’

‘Certainly. It was a small group of statuary by a good man and rather
valuable.’

‘I’m afraid, M. Thévenet, I haven’t got the matter clear yet. It
would oblige us both very much if you would be kind enough to tell us
all you know about the sending out of that cask.’

‘With pleasure.’ He touched a bell and a clerk entered.

‘Bring me,’ he said, ‘all the papers about the sale of that group of
Le Mareschal’s to M. Felix of London.’ He turned again to his
visitors.

‘Perhaps I had better begin by explaining our business to you. It is
in reality three businesses carried on simultaneously by one firm.
First, we make plaster casts of well-known pieces. They are not
valuable and sell for very little. Secondly, we make monuments,
tombstones, decorative stone panels and the like for buildings, rough
work, but fairly good. Lastly we trade in really fine sculpture,
acting as agents between the artists and the public. We have usually
a considerable number of such good pieces in our showroom. It was one
of these latter, a 1400 franc group, that was ordered by M. Felix.’

‘Felix ordered it?’ burst in Burnley, ‘but there, pardon me. I must
not interrupt.’

The clerk returned at this moment and laid some papers on his
principal’s desk. The latter turned them over, selected one, and
handed it to Burnley.

‘Here is his letter, you see, received by us on the morning of the
30th of March, and enclosing notes for 1500 francs. The envelope bore
the London postmark.’

The letter was written by hand on one side of a single sheet of paper
and was as follows:--


                    ‘141 West Jubb Street,

                      ‘Tottenham Court Road,

                        ‘London, W.C.,

                                  _29th March, 1912._

‘Messrs Dupierre et Cie.,

  ‘Rue Provence,

    ‘Rue de la Convention,

      ‘Grenelle, Paris.

‘GENTLEMEN.--I am anxious to purchase the group of statuary in the
left-hand corner back of your Boulevard des Capucines showroom,
looking from the street. The group is of three female figures, two
seated and one standing. There can be no doubt about the one I mean,
as it is the only such in the left of the window.

‘Please forward immediately to the above address.

‘I do not know the exact price, but understand it is about 1500
francs. I therefore enclose notes for that sum, and if a balance
remains on either side it can be adjusted by letter.

‘I may say that an unexpected call to England prevented me ordering
this in person.

                    ‘Yours, etc.

                           Léon Felix.’


Inspector Burnley examined the letter.

‘You will allow us to keep this in the meantime, I presume?’ he asked.

‘Certainly.’

‘You said the money was in notes. You mean, I take it, ordinary State
paper money whose source could not be traced; not any kind of cheque
or draft payable through a bank?’

‘Precisely.’

‘Well, sir, pardon my interruption.’

‘There is little more to add. The group was packed and despatched on
the day we received the letter. Its price was, as a matter of fact,
only 1400 francs, and the balance of 100 francs was therefore
enclosed with it. This was considered as safe as any other way of
sending it, as the cask was insured for its full value.’

‘The cask? You packed it then in a cask?’

‘Yes. We make a special kind of cask in two sizes, very heavy and
strong, for sending out such pieces. It is our own idea, and we are
rather proud of it. We find it simpler and safer than a crate.’

‘We have the cask in a cart outside. Perhaps, if we brought it in,
you would be good enough to see if it could be identified, firstly if
it is yours, and secondly, if so, if it is the particular one you
sent to Felix.’

‘Well, you see, unfortunately it was sent from our showrooms in the
Boulevard des Capucines. If you have time to take it there I will
instruct the manager to assist you in every way in his power. Indeed,
I will go with you myself. I shall not be able to rest until the
matter is cleared up.’

The detectives thanked him and, while Lefarge was instructing the
carter, M. Thévenet procured a taxi and they drove to the Boulevard
des Capucines.




CHAPTER XII

AT THE GARE ST. LAZARE

The showrooms consisted of a small but luxuriously fitted up shop,
containing many objects of excellence and value. M. Thévenet
introduced the manager, M. Thomas, a young and capable looking man,
who invited them into his office. He did not speak English, and
Lefarge carried on the conversation.

‘These gentlemen,’ said M. Thévenet, ‘are making some inquiries about
the sale of Le Mareschal’s group to Mr. Felix of London last week. I
want you to tell them all you can, Thomas.’

The young man bowed.

‘With pleasure, monsieur.’

In a few words Lefarge put him in possession of the main facts.
‘Perhaps,’ he continued, ‘if you would be kind enough to tell me all
that you know, I could then ask questions on any point I did not
understand.’

‘But certainly, monsieur. There is not much to tell.’ He looked up
some memoranda. ‘On Tuesday week, the 30th of March, we had a phone
from the head office saying that M. Le Mareschal’s last group, which
we had on exhibition in our window, was sold. We were to send it at
once to M. Léon Felix, at the London address you know. Also we were
to enclose 100 francs, refund of an overpayment of the cost. This was
done. The group and the money were duly packed and despatched.
Everything was perfectly in order and in accordance with our usual
custom. The only remarkable feature in the whole transaction was the
absence of a receipt from Felix. I do not think I can recall another
instance in which we were not advised of our goods safe arrival, and
in this case it was doubly to be expected, owing to the enclosure of
money. I might perhaps mention also that on that same Tuesday we had
a telephone call from M. Felix, through from London, asking when and
by what route we were sending the cask, to which I replied in person.’

The young man paused, and Lefarge asked how the group was packed.

‘In a number A cask, our usual practice.’

‘We have a cask coming along. It will be here presently. Could you
identify it?’

‘Possibly I or the foreman might.’

‘Well, M. Thévenet, I do not think we can get any further till it
arrives. There would just be time for _dejeuner_. We hope you and M.
Thomas will give us the pleasure of your company.’

This was agreed to, and they lunched at one of the comfortable
restaurants on the Boulevard. When they returned to the shop the cart
was waiting.

‘We had better have him round to the yard,’ said M. Thomas. ‘If you
will go through I will show him the way.’

The yard was a small open area surrounded by sheds. Into one of these
the cart was backed and the cask unpacked. M. Thomas examined it.

‘That’s certainly one of our casks,’ he said. ‘They are our own
design and, so far as I am aware, are used by no one else.’

‘But, M. Thomas,’ said Lefarge, ‘can you identify it in any special
manner? We do not, of course, doubt what you have said, but if it
could be established that this particular cask had passed through
your yard it would be important. Otherwise, if you judge only by
likeness to type, we cannot be sure that some one has not copied your
design to try and start a false scent.’

‘I see what you mean, but I fear I cannot certify what you want. But
I’ll call the foreman and packers. Possibly some of them can help
you.’

He went into another of the sheds, returning immediately with four
men.

‘Look at that cask, men,’ he said. ‘Have any of you ever seen it
before?’

The men advanced and inspected the cask minutely, looking at it from
all sides. Two of them retreated, shaking their heads, but the third,
an elderly man with white hair, spoke up.

‘Yes,’ he said. ‘I packed this cask not a fortnight ago.’

‘How are you so certain of that?’ asked Lefarge.

‘By this, monsieur,’ said the man, pointing to the broken stave.
‘That stave was split. I remember quite well the shape of the crack.
I noticed it, and wondered if I should report it to the foreman, and
then I thought it was safe enough and didn’t. But I told my mate
about it. See here, Jean,’ he called to the fourth man, ‘is that the
crack I showed you some days ago, or is it only like it?’

The fourth man advanced and inspected it in his turn.

‘It’s the same one,’ he said confidently. ‘I know, because I thought
that split was the shape of my hand, and so it is.’

He placed his hand on the adjoining stave, and there certainly was a
rude resemblance in shape.

‘I suppose neither of you men remember what you packed in it, or whom
it was for?’

‘As far as I remember,’ said the third man, ‘it was a statue of three
or four women, but I don’t remember who it was for.’

‘It wasn’t for a man called Felix, of London?’

‘I remember the name, but I can’t say if it was for him.’

‘Thank you. Would you tell me how it was packed? What steadied the
group?’

‘Sawdust, monsieur, simply sawdust, carefully rammed.’

‘Can you tell me if the railway cart took it from here, or how did it
go?’

‘No, monsieur, it was taken by one of our own motor lorries from the
Grenelle works.’

‘Did you know the driver?’

‘Yes, monsieur, it was Jules Fouchard.’

‘I suppose, monsieur,’ Lefarge turned to the managing director, ‘we
could interview this man Fouchard?’

‘Why, certainly. M. Thomas will find out where he is.’

‘Pardon, messieurs,’ interposed the elderly packer, ‘but he’s here
now. Or at least I saw him not ten minutes ago.’

‘Good. Then try and find him, and tell him not to go away till we
have seen him.’

In a few moments the driver was found and, having asked him to wait
outside, Lefarge continued his questions to the packer.

‘At what o’clock did the cask leave here?’

‘About four. I had it packed and ready by two, but the lorry did not
come for a couple of hours after that.’

‘Did you see it loaded up?’

‘I helped to load it up.’

‘Now tell me,’ continued Lefarge, ‘where was the cask between the
time you put the group in and the arrival of the motor?’

‘Here, monsieur, in this shed where I packed it.’

‘And did you leave it during that time?’

‘No, monsieur, I was here all the time.’

‘So that--please be very careful about this--no one could have
tampered with it in any way up till the time it left the yard?’

‘Absolutely impossible, monsieur. It is quite out of the question.’

‘Thank you, we are exceedingly obliged to you,’ said Lefarge,
slipping a couple of francs into the man’s hand as he withdrew. ‘Now,
could I see the lorry driver?’

Jules Fouchard proved to be a small, energetic looking man, with
sharp features and intelligent eyes. He was sure of his facts, and
gave his answers clearly and without hesitation.

‘M. Fouchard,’ began Lefarge, ‘this gentleman and I are trying to
trace the movements of one of your casks, which I am informed left
here by your lorry about four o’clock on Tuesday, the thirtieth of
March last. Can you recall the occasion?’

‘Permit me to get my delivery book, monsieur.’

He disappeared for a moment, returning with a small, cloth-covered
book. Rapidly turning over the pages, he found what he was looking
for.

‘For M. Léon Felix, 141 West Jubb Street, Tottenham Court Road,
London? Yes, monsieur. It was the only cask which left here that day.
I took it to the Gare St. Lazare and handed it to the railway
officials. Here is their signature for it.’

He passed the book over and Lefarge read the name.

‘Thank you. Who is this Jean Duval? I shall probably want to see him
and would like to know where to find him.’

‘He is a clerk in the departure passenger cloak-room.’

‘You left here with the cask, I understand, about four o’clock?’

‘About that, monsieur.’

‘And what time did you arrive at the Gare St. Lazare?’

‘Just a few minutes later. I went direct.’

‘You didn’t stop on the way?’

‘No, monsieur.’

‘Well now, monsieur, please don’t answer till you have considered
carefully. Was there any way in which the cask could have been
tampered with between the time it was loaded up here and your handing
it over to Jean Duval at the Gare St. Lazare?’

‘None, monsieur. No one could have got on the lorry without my
knowledge, much less have done anything to the cask.’

‘And I take it from that, it would have been equally impossible to
remove it entirely and substitute another?’

‘It would have been absolutely out of the question, monsieur.’

After thanking and dismissing the driver, they returned to the
manager’s room.

‘The position, then, seems to be this,’ said Lefarge, as they sat
down. ‘The cask left your yard containing a group of statuary, and it
arrived in London containing the dead body of a woman. The change
must therefore have been effected along the route, and the evidence
of the steamer people seems to narrow it down to between here and
Rouen.’

‘Why Rouen?’ asked both gentlemen in a breath.

‘Well, I should have said, perhaps, between here and the time of
loading on to the steamer at Rouen wharf.’

‘But I am afraid you are making a mistake there,’ said M. Thomas;
‘the cask went by Havre. All our stuff does.’

‘Pardon me, M. Thomas, for seeming to contradict you,’ said Burnley,
in his somewhat halting French, ‘but I am as certain of it as of my
presence here now, however the cask may have been sent, it certainly
arrived in the London Docks by the Insular and Continental Steam
Navigation Company’s boat from Rouen.’

‘But that is most mysterious,’ rejoined M. Thomas. He struck a bell
and a clerk appeared.

‘Bring me the railway papers about the sending of that cask to Felix,
London, on the thirtieth ultimo.’

‘Here you are,’ he said to Burnley, when the clerk returned. ‘Look at
that. That is the receipt from the St. Lazare people for the freight
on the cask between this and the address in London, per passenger
train via Havre and Southampton.’

‘Well,’ said Burnley, ‘this gets me altogether. Tell me,’ he added
after a pause, ‘when Felix telephoned you from London asking when and
by what route you were sending the cask, what did you reply?’

‘I told him it was crossing on Tuesday night, the 30th of March, by
Havre and Southampton.’

‘We’d better go to St. Lazare,’ said Lefarge. ‘Perhaps M. Thomas will
kindly lend us that receipt?’

‘Certainly, but you must please sign for it, as I shall want it for
my audit.’

They parted with expressions of thanks on the part of the detectives,
who promised to keep the others advised of the progress of the
inquiry.

A taxi brought them to St. Lazare, where, at the office of the
superintendent of the line, Lefarge’s card had the usual magical
effect.

‘Please be seated, gentlemen,’ said the superintendent, ‘and let me
know what I can do for you.’

Lefarge showed him the receipt.

‘The matter is somewhat puzzling,’ he said. ‘That cask, as you see,
was invoiced out via Havre and Southampton on the 30th ultimo, and
yet it turned up in London on Monday, the 5th instant, by the Insular
and Continental Steam Navigation Company’s boat _Bullfinch_ from
Rouen. The contents of the cask when it left Messrs. Dupierre’s
showroom was a group of statuary, but when it arrived at St.
Katharine’s Docks--well, I may tell you, monsieur, in confidence--it
contained the body of a woman--murdered.’

The superintendent gave an exclamation of surprise.

‘You see, therefore, monsieur, the necessity of our tracing the cask
as privately as possible.’

‘I certainly do. If you will wait a few minutes, gentlemen, I can get
you part at least of the information you want.’

The few minutes had expanded into nearly an hour before the
superintendent returned.

‘Sorry to have kept you so long,’ he apologised. ‘I find that your
cask was delivered at our outward passenger cloak-room at about 4.15
p.m. on the 30th ultimo. It remained there until about 7.00 p.m., and
during all this time it was under the personal supervision of one of
the clerks named Duval, a most conscientious and reliable man. He
states it stood in full view of his desk, and it would have been
quite impossible for any one to have tampered with it. He
particularly remembers it from its peculiar shape and its weight, as
well as because it was an unusual object to send by passenger train.
At about 7.00 p.m. it was taken charge of by two porters and placed
in the van of the 7.47 p.m. English boat train. The guard of the
train was present when they put it into the van, and he should have
been there till the train left. The guard is unfortunately off duty
at present, but I have sent for him and will get his statement. Once
the train left, the cask would simply be bound to go to Havre. If it
had not done so with that insurance on it, we should have heard about
it. However, I will communicate with our agent at Havre, and I should
be able to get definite information in the morning.’

‘But, my dear sir,’ cried Burnley helplessly, ‘I know of my own
knowledge that it came by long sea from Rouen. I don’t for one moment
doubt your word, but there must be a mistake somewhere.’

‘Ah,’ returned the superintendent, smiling, ‘now I come to something
that will interest you. The cask we have just spoken of was sent out
on the evening of the 30th ult. But I find another cask was
despatched three days later, on the 1st instant. It also was
addressed to M. Felix at the same London address and sent in by
Messrs. Dupierre. It was labelled via Rouen and the I. and C.
Company’s boat. It went by goods train that night, and I will get our
Rouen agent to try and trace it, though, as he would have had no
reason to remark it, I doubt if he will be able to do so.’

Burnley swore. ‘I beg your pardon, sir, but this gets deeper and
deeper. Two casks!’ He groaned.

‘At least,’ said the superintendent, ‘it has cleared up your
difficulty about how a cask that left by one route arrived by
another.’

‘It has done that, monsieur, and we are really extremely obliged for
all your kindness and trouble.’

‘If there is anything else I can do I shall be very pleased.’

‘Thank you again. The only other point is to trace the cart that
brought the second cask.’

‘Ah,’ the superintendent shook his head; ‘I can’t do that for you,
you know.’

‘Of course not. But perhaps you could get hold of, or put us in a
position to get hold of your men who received the cask? We might get
some information from them.’

‘I shall do what I can. Now, gentlemen, if you will call any time in
the morning, I shall let you have any further information I receive.’

The detectives, having thanked him again, bowed themselves out and,
strolling up and down the vast concourse, discussed their plans.

‘I should like to wire to London now, and also to write by to-night’s
post,’ said Burnley. ‘They’ll want to get on to tracing that second
cask from Waterloo as soon as possible.’

‘Well, the ordinary letter-boxes are clear at half-past six, but if
you are late you can post in the van of the English mail at the Gare
du Nord up till 9.10 p.m., so you have plenty of time for that later.
What about sending your wire from here now, and then going to the
Hotel Continental to look up your friend Felix?’

Burnley agreed, and when the telegram had been sent they took another
taxi and drove to the Continental. Lefarge’s card produced
immediately a polite and agreeable manager, anxious to assist.

‘We are trying to trace a man whom we believe stayed here recently,’
explained Lefarge. ‘His name was Léon Felix.’

‘A rather short and slight man with a black beard and a pleasing
manner?’ replied the manager. ‘Oh, yes, I know M. Felix very well,
and very pleasant I have always found him. He was here recently. I
will inquire the exact dates.’

He disappeared for a few seconds.

‘He was here from Saturday, the 13th of March, till Monday, the 15th.
Then he returned on Friday, the 26th, and left again on the morning
of Sunday, the 28th, to catch the 8.20 train for England at the Gare
du Nord.’

The two detectives exchanged glances of surprise.

‘Could you let me compare his signature in your register with one I
have here?’ asked Burnley. ‘I am anxious to make sure it is the same
man.’

‘Certainly,’ replied the manager, leading the way.

The signature was the same, and, after thanking the manager, they
took their departure.

‘That’s an unexpected find,’ Burnley remarked. ‘Felix said nothing to
me about being here ten days ago.’

‘It’s a bit suggestive, you know,’ returned his companion. ‘We’ll
have to find out what he was doing during the visit.’

Burnley nodded.

‘Now for my report, anyway,’ he said.

‘I think I’ll go to the Sûreté and do the same,’ answered Lefarge.

They parted, having arranged to meet later in the evening. Burnley
wrote a detailed account of his day to his Chief, asking him to have
inquiries made at Waterloo about the second cask. Having posted it,
he gave himself up to a study of Felix’s letter ordering the group of
statuary.

It was written on a sheet of the same kind of paper as those of the
two typewritten letters received by Felix. Burnley carefully compared
the watermarks and satisfied himself on the point. Then, drawing from
his pocket the address he had got Felix to write in the house on the
Great North Road, he compared them.

The handwriting was the same in each, at least that was his first
impression, but on a closer examination he felt somewhat less
certain. He was not a handwriting expert, but he had come across a
good many of these men, and was aware of some of their methods. He
applied those he knew and at last came to the conclusion that Felix
had written the order, though a certain doubt remained. He wrote
another note to his Chief and enclosed the two letters, asking him to
have them compared.

Then he went out to spend the evening with Lefarge.




CHAPTER XIII

THE OWNER OF THE DRESS

When some time later the two friends met, Lefarge said:--

‘I saw the Chief, and he’s not very satisfied with the way things are
going. None of those women have done anything with the clothes. He’s
got a notion we ought to advertise and he wants us to go there at
nine to-night and talk it over.’

Accordingly, at the hour named, they presented themselves at the
office in the Sûreté.

‘Sit down, gentlemen,’ began the Chief. ‘I wanted to consult with you
about this case. In our efforts to identify the dead woman, which we
agreed was our first essential, we have unfortunately had no success.
Our three women have done exceedingly well as far as covering ground
goes, but they have had no luck. You, gentlemen, have found out some
important facts, but they have not led in this particular direction.
Now, I am inclined to think we ought to advertise and I’d like to
hear your views.’

‘What particular advertisements do you suggest, sir?’ asked Burnley.

‘For everything. Advertise, in each case with 100 francs reward, for
information about the dress, the underclothes if singular in any way,
the rings, the comb, and the body itself.’

There was silence for a few moments, and then Burnley replied
hesitatingly:--

‘We have a bit of prejudice at Scotland Yard about advertising except
in special cases. I think the idea is that it puts people on their
guard who might otherwise give themselves away. But in this case it
would probably be the quickest way to a result.’

‘To me it would seem,’ said Lefarge, ‘that even if there was a band
of persons anxious to hush this murder up, there would also be enough
outside that band to answer every one of the advertisements.’

‘That is rather my view,’ agreed the Chief. ‘Take the servants, for
example. A woman wearing such clothes is certain to have lived in a
house with several servants. Some one of them is bound to read the
advertisement and recognise the description. If he or she intends to
try for the reward we get the information, if not, he will certainly
show the paper to the others, one of whom is almost certain to come.
The same thing applies to shop assistants, none of whom could
conceivably wish to keep the thing a secret. Yes, I think we’ll try
it. Will you draft out some forms, something like this, I should
imagine. “One hundred francs reward will be paid for information
leading to the identification of the body of a lady, believed to have
died about the 30th March”--say “died,” of course, not “was
murdered”--then the description, and “Apply at any Police Station.”
The others would be for information leading to the identification of
the purchaser of the various clothes.’

‘I shall have to see the three ladies for a proper description of the
clothes,’ said Lefarge.

‘Of course. I’ll send for them.’

M. Chauvet telephoned to the department in question, and, after a
delay of a few minutes, the three female detectives came in. With
their help the advertisements were drawn up, and when the Chief had
read and approved they were telephoned to the principal papers for
insertion next day. Special trade journals relating to the millinery
and jewellery trades were also supplied with copies for their next
issues.

‘By the way,’ observed M. Chauvet, when the women had left, ‘I have
had a report about the lottery business. M. Le Gautier is correct on
both points. He paid in the cheque on the date stated, and the
drawing does not take place till next Thursday. The probabilities
seem therefore to point to his being an honest man and having had
nothing to do with the letter. And now, with regard to to-morrow.
What do you propose?’

‘First, monsieur, we thought of going to the Gare St. Lazare to see
if the superintendent has any further information for us. I thought
we should then try and trace back the cask that went via Rouen.’

‘Very good. I think I shall try another scent also, though not a very
promising one. I shall put on a couple of men to go round the
fashionable photographers with that photo of yours, and try if they
can find a portrait of the woman. I had rather you could have done
it’--he looked at Burnley--‘because you have seen the body, but they
may get something. That’s all, then, is it not? Good-night.’

‘Hard lines being done out of our evening,’ said Lefarge, when they
had left the great man’s room. ‘I was going to propose the Folies
Bergères. It’s not too late yet, though. What do you say?’

‘I’m on,’ answered Burnley, ‘but I don’t want to stay more than an
hour or so. I can always work better on plenty of sleep.’

‘Right,’ returned Lefarge, and, calling a taxi, the two friends were
driven to the famous music-hall.

Lefarge called for Burnley the next morning at the latter’s hotel,
and they made their way to the superintendent’s office at the Gare
St. Lazare.

‘Well, gentlemen,’ said their friend of the previous afternoon,
motioning them to be seated, ‘I think I’ve got the information you
want.’ He took up some papers. ‘I have here the receipt of the
Southampton boat people for what we may call number one cask, which
was handed them on the arrival of the 7.47 from this station on the
night of the 30th ult. Here,’ he took up a similar paper, ‘I have the
receipt of the I. and C. Steam Navigation Co. at Rouen for cask
number two, which left here by goods train on the 1st inst., and was
got on board on the 3rd. Finally, our agent at the Goods Station at
the rue Cardinet informs me he has found the porters who assisted to
unload this number two cask when it arrived. You can see them by
going down there now.’

‘I can hardly find words to thank you, sir,’ said Lefarge, ‘your help
has been of the utmost value.’

‘Delighted, I am sure.’

They parted with mutual compliments, and the detectives took a
Ceinture train to Batignoles, and walked down the rue Cardinet to the
vast goods station.

They introduced themselves to the agent, who was expecting them, and
brought them through long passages and across wide yards alive with
traffic to a dock in the side of one of the huge goods sheds for
outward bound traffic. Calling up two blue-bloused porters and
instructing them to answer the detectives’ questions, he excused
himself and took his leave.

‘Now, men,’ said Lefarge, ‘we’ll be much obliged for some information
and there’ll be a few francs going if you can give it.’

The men expressed anxiety to supply whatever was needed.

‘Do you remember on Thursday week, the 1st instant, unloading a cask
labelled for Felix, London, via Rouen and long sea?’

‘But yes, monsieur, we remember it,’ said the men in chorus.

‘You must unload hundreds of casks. How did you come to notice this
one so specially?’

‘Ah, monsieur,’ replied one of the men, ‘had monsieur had to lift it
himself he also would have noticed it. The weight was remarkable,
extraordinary. The shape also was peculiar. In the middle there was
no bulge.’

‘At what time did it arrive here?’

‘Just after six in the evening, monsieur, between five and ten
minutes past.’

‘It is a good while since then. How do you come to remember the time
so exactly?’

‘Because, monsieur,’ the man smiled, ‘we were going off duty at
half-past six, and we were watching the time.’

‘Can you tell me who brought it to the yard?’

The men shrugged their shoulders.

‘Alas! monsieur, we do not know,’ the spokesman answered. ‘The carter
we would recognise if we saw him again, but neither of us know where
he lives nor the name of his employers.’

‘Can you describe him?’

‘But certainly, monsieur. He was a small man, thin and sickly
looking, with white hair and a clean-shaven face.

‘Well, keep a good look-out, and if you see him again find out who he
is and let me know. Here is my address. If you do that there will be
fifty francs for you.’

Lefarge handed over a couple of five-franc pieces and the detectives
left, followed by the promises and thanks of the men.

‘I suppose an advertisement for the carter is the next scheme,’ said
Burnley, as they walked back in the Clichy direction.

‘We had better report to headquarters, I think,’ replied Lefarge,
‘and see what the Chief advises. If he approves, we might get our
advertisement into to-night’s papers.’

Burnley agreed, and when they had had some lunch they rang up the
Sûreté from the nearest call office.

‘That Lefarge?’ was the answer. ‘The Chief wants you to return
immediately. He’s got some news.’

They took the Metro from Clichy to Châtelet and reached the Sûreté as
the clocks were striking two. M. Chauvet was in.

‘Ah,’ he said, as they entered, ‘we’ve had a reply to the dress
advertisement. Madame Clothilde’s people near the Palais Royal rang
up about eleven saying they believed they had supplied the dress. We
got hold of Mlle. Lecoq, who was working it, and sent her over, and
she returned here about an hour ago. The dress was sold in February
to Madame Annette Boirac, at the corner of Avenue de l’Alma and rue
St. Jean, not far from the American Church. You’d better go round
there now and make some inquiries.’

‘Yes, monsieur,’ said Lefarge, ‘but before we go there is this
question of the cask,’ and he told what they had learned, and
suggested the advertisement about the carter.

M. Chauvet had just begun his reply when a knock came to the door and
a boy entered with a card.

‘The gentleman’s waiting to see you on urgent business monsieur,’ he
said.

‘Hallo!’ said the Chief, with a gesture of surprise. ‘Listen to
this.’ He read out the words, ‘“M. Raoul Boirac, rue St. Jean, 1,
Avenue de l’Alma.” This will be Mme. Annette B.’s husband, I presume.
These advertisements are doing well. You had better stop, both of
you,’ and then to the boy, ‘Wait a moment.’

He picked up the telephone, pressing one of the buttons on the stand.

‘Send Mlle. Joubert here immediately.’

In a few moments a girl stenographer entered. M. Chauvet pointed to a
corner of the room where Burnley had noticed a screen, set back as if
to be out of the way.

‘I want every word of this conversation, mademoiselle,’ said the
Chief. ‘Please be careful to miss none of it, and also to keep quiet.’

The girl bowed and, having seen her settled behind the screen, the
Chief turned to the messenger.

‘I’ll see him now.’

In a few seconds M. Boirac entered the room. He was a strongly built
man of rather under middle age, with thick black hair and a large
moustache. On his face was an expression of strain, as if he was
passing through a period of acute bodily or mental pain. He was
dressed entirely in black and his manner was quiet and repressed.

He looked round the room and then, as M. Chauvet rose to greet him,
he bowed ceremoniously.

‘M. le Chef de la Sûreté?’ he asked, and, as M. Chauvet bowed him to
a chair, continued,--

‘I have called to see you, monsieur, on a very painful matter. I had
hoped to have been able to do so alone,’ he paused slightly, ‘but
these gentlemen, I presume, are completely in your confidence?’ He
spoke slowly with a deliberate pronunciation of each word, as if he
had thought out whether that was the best possible he could use and
had come to the conclusion that it was.

‘If, monsieur,’ returned M. Chauvet, ‘your business is in connection
with the recent unfortunate disappearance of your wife, these
gentlemen are the officers who are in charge of the case, and their
presence would be, I think, to the advantage of all of us.’

M. Boirac sprang from his chair, deep emotion showing under his iron
control.

‘Then it is she?’ he asked, in a suppressed voice. ‘You know? It
seemed possible from the advertisement, but I wasn’t sure. I
hoped--that perhaps---- There is no doubt, I suppose?’

‘I shall tell you all we know, M. Boirac, and you can form your own
conclusions. First, here is a photograph of the body found.’

M. Boirac took the slip of card and looked at it earnestly.

‘It is she,’ he murmured hoarsely, ‘it is she without a doubt.’

He paused, overcome, and, the others respecting his feelings, there
was silence for some moments. Then with a strenuous effort he
continued, speaking hardly above a whisper,--

‘Tell me,’ his voice shook as he pronounced the words with
difficulty, ‘what makes her look so terrible? And those awful marks
at her throat? What are they?’

‘It is with the utmost regret I have to tell you, M. Boirac, that
your wife was undoubtedly murdered by strangulation. Further, you
must know that she had been dead several days when that photograph
was taken.’

M. Boirac dropped into his chair, and sunk his head in his hands.

‘My God!’ he panted. ‘My poor Annette! Though I had no cause to love
her, I did, God help me, in spite of everything, I did. I know it now
when I have lost her. Tell me,’ he continued in a low tone after
another pause, ‘tell me the details.’

‘I fear they are rather harrowing, monsieur,’ said the Chief, with
sympathetic sorrow in his tone. ‘A certain cask was noticed by the
London police, a detail, with which I need hardly trouble you, having
aroused their suspicions. The cask was seized and opened, and the
body was found inside.’

The visitor remained with his face buried in his hands. After a few
seconds he raised himself and looked at M. Chauvet.

‘Any clue?’ he asked, in a choking tone. ‘Have you any clue to the
villain who has done this?’

‘We have a number of clues,’ returned the Chief, ‘but have not yet
had time to work them. I have no doubt that we will have our hands on
the murderer shortly. In the meantime, M. Boirac, to make assurance
doubly sure, I would be glad if you would see if you can identify
these clothes.’

‘Her clothes? Oh, spare me that. But there, I understand it is
necessary.’

M. Chauvet picked up his telephone and gave directions for the
clothes to be sent in. The jewellery was not available, as Mlle.
Blaise had taken it in her round of the shops.

‘Alas! Yes,’ cried M. Boirac sadly, when he saw the dress, ‘it is
hers, it is hers. She wore it the evening she left. There can be no
further doubt. My poor, mistaken Annette!’

‘I am afraid, M. Boirac, at the risk of giving you pain, I must ask
you to be good enough to tell us all you can about the circumstances
of your wife’s disappearance. These gentlemen are Mr. Burnley of the
London police, and M. Lefarge of our own staff, and they are
collaborating in the matter. You may speak before them with complete
freedom.’

M. Boirac bowed.

‘I will tell you everything, monsieur, but you must pardon me if I
seem a little incoherent. I am not myself.’

M. Chauvet stepped to a press and took from it a flask of brandy.

‘Monsieur,’ he said, ‘you have our fullest sympathy. Allow me to
offer you a little of this.’ He poured out a stiff glass.

‘I thank you, monsieur,’ returned the visitor, as he drank the
cordial. It pulled him together, and he became once more the
unemotional man of business. He kept himself well in hand and did
not, during the telling of his story, allow his emotion to overcome
him, though at times it was clear all his powers of self-control were
needed. In a stronger voice he began his statement, and his three
companions settled themselves more comfortably in their chairs to
listen.




CHAPTER XIV

M. BOIRAC MAKES A STATEMENT

‘My name and address you know,’ began M. Boirac. ‘In business I am
the managing director of the Avrotte Pump Construction Co., whose
works are situated off the rue Championnet, not far from the Omnibus
Co.’s depot. I am fairly well off, and we lived comfortably, my wife
going a good deal into society.

‘On Saturday, the 27th ult., this day fortnight, we had a dinner
party at the Avenue de l’Alma. Our principal guest was the Spanish
ambassador, at whose house my wife had visited when in Madrid the
previous year. Among the others was a M. Léon Felix, an old friend of
my wife’s, who lived in London, and was in some business there. The
guests arrived and we sat down to dinner, but unfortunately before
the meal was concluded a telephone message came for me from the works
to say that a serious accident had happened, and requiring my
immediate presence. There was nothing for it but to apologise to my
guests and go off at once, which I did, though I promised to return
at the earliest possible moment.

‘When I reached the works I found that the main bed casting of a new
200-h.p. engine which was being put in during the week-end, had
slipped and slewed sideways while being got into place, killing one
man and seriously injuring two others. One of the cylinders was
fractured, and the whole casting had jammed between the wall and the
flywheel pit and could not be got out.

‘As soon as I saw how serious things were, I telephoned home to say I
would be very late, and that there would be no chance of my returning
in time to see my guests. However, we got on much better than I
expected, and it was barely eleven when I turned out of the works.
Not seeing a taxi, I walked to the Simplon station of the Metro. My
route, as you will understand, involved a change of trains at
Châtelet and I accordingly alighted there. I had hardly done so when
I was clapped on the back by some one, and turning, found an American
acquaintance called Myron H. Burton, with whom I had stayed in the
same hotel in New York and with whom I had become friendly. We stood
in talk for some time, and then I asked him where he was staying,
inviting him to put up at my house instead of returning to his hotel.
He declined, saying he was going to Orléans by the 12.35 from the
Quai d’Orsay, and asked me to go and see him off and have a drink at
the station. I hesitated, but remembering I was not expected at home,
I agreed and we set off. This night being mild and pleasant we walked
along the quais, but when we reached the Port Royal it was barely a
quarter to twelve. Burton suggested continuing our stroll, which we
did, going round the Place de la Concorde and the end of the Champs
Élysées. Interested in our talk, we forgot the passage of time, and
arrived at the Gare Quai d’Orsay with only a minute to spare for my
friend to catch his train and, therefore, to his apparent great
chagrin, missing the drinks to which he had wished to treat me. I
felt wakeful, and began to walk home, but when I had gone about
half-way, rain began to fall. I looked for a taxi, but could not see
one, and therefore continued my journey on foot, arriving home about
one o’clock.

‘François, the butler, met me in the hall. He seemed uneasy.

‘“I heard the front door bang not ten minutes ago, monsieur,” he
said, as I took off my wet coat. “I got up to see if anything was
wrong.”

‘“Got up?” I said. “How had you come to go to bed before I returned?”

‘“Madame told me to, monsieur, about half-past eleven. She said you
would be very late and that she would be sitting up.”

‘“All right,” I said, “where is Madame?”

‘He hesitated.

‘“I don’t know, monsieur,” he said at length.

‘“Don’t know?” I said. I was growing angry. “Has she gone to bed?”

‘“She has not gone to bed, monsieur,” he answered.

‘I am not, M. de Chef, an imaginative man, but suddenly a feeling of
foreboding swept over me. I hurried into the drawing-room and from
that to my wife’s small sitting-room. They were both empty. I ran to
her bedroom. There was no one there. Then I recollected she had
frequently waited for me in my study. I went there to find it also
untenanted, and I was just about to withdraw when I saw on my desk a
letter which had not been there earlier in the evening. It was
addressed to me in my wife’s handwriting, and, with a terrible
sinking of the heart, I opened it. Here, M. le Chef, it is.’

It was a short note, written on a sheet of cream-laid notepaper and
without date or address. It read:--


‘I do not ask you to forgive me for what I am doing to-night, Raoul,
for I feel it would be quite too much to expect, but I do ask you to
believe that the thought of the pain and annoyance it will be bound
to give you cuts me to the heart. You have always been just and kind
according to your lights, but you know, Raoul, as well as I do, that
we have never loved each other. You have loved your business and your
art collection, and I have loved--Léon Felix, and now I am going to
him. I shall just disappear, and you will never hear of me again.
You, I hope, will get your divorce, and be happy with some more
worthy woman.

‘Good-bye, Raoul, and do not think worse of me than you can help.

                                                        ANNETTE.’


M. Boirac bowed his head while the others read this unhappy note. He
seemed overcome with emotion, and there was silence in the Chief’s
room for a few seconds. The sun shone gaily in with never a hint of
tragedy, lighting up that bent figure in the arm-chair, and bringing
into pitiless prominence details that should have been cloaked
decently in shadow, from the drops of moisture on the drawn brow to
the hands clenched white beneath the edge of the desk. Then, as they
waited, he pulled himself together with an effort and continued:--

‘I was almost beside myself from the blow, and yet I instinctively
felt I must act as if nothing had happened. I steadied myself and
called to François, who was still in the hall:--

‘“It’s all right, François. I’ve had a note from Madame. She was
obliged to go out at a moment’s notice to catch the Swiss train. She
had a message that her mother is dying.”

‘He replied in his ordinary tone, but I could see that he did not
believe one word. The understanding and the pity in his eyes almost
drove me frantic. I spoke again as carelessly as I could,--

‘“I wonder had she time to call Suzanne and get properly dressed. You
might send her here and then you can get back to bed.”

‘Suzanne was my wife’s maid, and when she came into the study I saw
from her startled and embarrassed air that she knew.

‘“Suzanne,” I said, “Madame has had to go to Switzerland suddenly and
unexpectedly. She had to rush off to catch the train without proper
time for packing, still, I hope she was able to take enough for the
journey?”

‘The girl answered at once in a nervous, frightened tone. “I have
just been to her room, monsieur. She has taken her fur coat and hat
and a pair of walking shoes. The evening shoes she was wearing
to-night are there where she changed them. She did not ring for me
and I did not hear her go to her room.”

‘I had become somewhat calmer by this time, and I was thinking
rapidly while she spoke.

‘“Ah, well,” I answered, “you had better pack some of her things
to-morrow so that I can send them after her. She will be staying with
her mother, and will no doubt be able to borrow what she wants till
her own things arrive.”

‘François was still hanging about the corridor. I sent them both to
bed and sat down to try and realise what had taken place.

‘I need hardly trouble you with my thoughts. For some days I was half
crazed, then I pulled myself together. Suzanne I sent home, saying I
had heard from Madame that she was employing one of her mother’s
maids.’

M. Boirac paused.

‘That,’ he said at length, ‘I think is all I have to tell you, M. le
Chef. From that awful evening until I saw your advertisement in the
_Figaro_ a couple of hours ago, I have not heard a syllable from
either my wife or Felix.’

M. Boirac had told his story simply and directly, and his manner
seemed to bear the impress of truth. The statement carried conviction
to his hearers, who felt their sympathy going out to this man who had
acted so loyally to the wife who had betrayed him. M. Chauvet spoke,--

‘Permit me to express to you, M. Boirac, our deep regret for what has
happened and particularly for your having had to come here and make
this painful statement. Still more we regret that the terrible
_dénouement_ should make it almost impossible to keep the matter
hushed up. Our search for the murderer has, of course, begun. We
shall not detain you any longer, except to ask you to repeat a few
names and hours so that we may note them to make your statement
complete.’

M. Boirac bowed.

‘I thank you for your courtesy, M. le Chef.’

The Chief continued,--

‘There is first of all your address. That we have on your card.
Next--I shall put it in question form--What time was dinner?’

‘Quarter to eight.’

‘And what time did the message come for you from your works?’

‘About a quarter to nine.’

‘And you arrived there?’

‘About nine-fifteen, I should think, I did not look. I walked to the
Champs Élysées and took a taxi.’

‘You said, I think, that you telephoned home then informing your wife
that you could not return until very late?’

‘I believe I did say that, but it is not strictly correct. I went to
see the damage immediately on arrival, and was occupied there for
some time. I should say I telephoned about ten o’clock.’

‘But you unexpectedly got away about eleven?’

‘That is so.’

‘So that you must have met your friend at Châtelet about twenty past
eleven?’

‘About that, I should think.’

‘Now your friend. I should like a note of his name and address.’

‘His name I have already given you, Myron H. Burton. His address I
unfortunately cannot, as I do not know it.’

‘His home address, then?’

‘I don’t know that, either. I met him in an hotel in New York. We
played billiards together a few times and became friendly enough, but
not to the extent of exchanging our family histories.’

‘When was that, M. Boirac?’

‘In the summer of 1908, no, 1909, three years ago.’

‘And the hotel?’

‘The Hudson View, the one that was burnt out last Christmas.’

‘I remember, a terrible business, that. Your friend went by the 12.35
to Orléans. He was staying there I suppose?’

‘No, he was changing there and going on, though where he was going I
do not know. He told me this because I remarked on his choosing such
a train--it does not get in until about 4.30--instead of sleeping in
Paris and going by an early express that would do the journey in two
hours.’

‘Oh, well, it is not of much importance. The only other thing, I
think, is the name and address of your wife’s maid.’

M. Boirac shook his head.

‘I’m sorry I can’t give you that either. I only know her as Suzanne.
But I dare say François or some of the other servants would know it.’

‘I shall have, with your permission, to send a man to look over the
house, and he can make inquiries. I am sure, M. Boirac, we are
extremely obliged to you for your information. And now, what about
the formal identification of the body? I have no doubt from what you
say it is indeed that of your wife, but I fear the law will require a
personal identification from you. Would it be convenient for you to
run over to London and see it? Interment has not yet, I understand,
taken place.’

M. Boirac moved uneasily. The suggestion was clearly most unwelcome
to him.

‘I needn’t say I would infinitely prefer not to go. However, if you
assure me it is necessary, I can have no choice in the matter.’

‘I am exceedingly sorry, but I fear it is quite necessary. A personal
examination is required in evidence of identification. And if I might
make a suggestion, I think that the visit should be made as soon as
convenient to you.’

The visitor shrugged his shoulders.

‘If I have to go, I may as well do it at once. I will cross to-night
and be at Scotland Yard at, say, 11.00 to-morrow. It is Scotland
Yard, I suppose?’

‘It is, monsieur. Very good. I will telephone to the authorities
there to expect you.’

The Chief rose and shook hands, and M. Boirac took his leave. When he
had gone, M. Chauvet jumped up and went to the screen.

‘Get half a dozen copies of that statement and the questions and
answers typed at once, mademoiselle. You can get a couple of the
other girls to help you.’

He turned to the two detectives.

‘Well, gentlemen, we have heard an interesting story, and, whatever
we may think of it, our first business will be to check it as far as
we can. I think you had better get away immediately to the Avenue de
l’Alma and see this François, if possible before Boirac gets back. Go
through the house and get anything you can, especially a sample of
the wife’s handwriting. Try also and trace the maid. In the meantime,
I will set some other inquiries on foot. You might call in about nine
to-night to report progress.’




CHAPTER XV

THE HOUSE IN THE AVENUE DE L’ALMA

Burnley and Lefarge took the tram along the quais and, dismounting at
the Pont Alma, proceeded up the Avenue on foot. The house was a
corner one fronting on the Avenue, but with the entrance in the side
street. It was set a few feet back from the footpath, and was a
Renaissance building of gray rubble masonry, with moulded architraves
and enrichments of red sandstone and the usual mansard roof.

The two men mounted the steps leading to the ornate porch. On their
right were the windows of a large room which formed the angle between
the two streets.

‘You can see into that room rather too clearly for my taste,’ said
Burnley. ‘Why, if that’s the drawing-room, as it looks to be by the
furniture, every caller can see just who’s visiting there as they
come up to the door.’

‘And conversely, I expect,’ returned Lefarge, ‘the hostess can see
her visitors coming and be prepared for them.’

The door was opened by an elderly butler of typical appearance,
respectability and propriety oozing out of every pore of his sleek
face. Lefarge showed his card.

‘I regret M. Boirac is not at home, monsieur,’ said the man politely,
‘but you will probably find him at the works in the rue Championnet.’

‘Thanks,’ returned Lefarge, ‘we have just had an interview with Mr.
Boirac, and it is really you we wish to see.’

The butler ushered them into a small sitting-room at the back of the
hall.

‘Yes, messieurs?’ he said.

‘Did you see an advertisement in this morning’s papers for the
identification of a lady’s body?’

‘I saw it, monsieur.’

‘I am sorry to say it was that of your mistress.’

François shook his head sadly.

‘I feared as much, monsieur,’ he said in a low tone.

‘M. Boirac saw the advertisement also. He came just now to the Sûreté
and identified the remains beyond any doubt. It is a painful case,
for I regret to tell you she had been murdered in a rather brutal
way, and now we are here with M. Boirac’s approval to make some
inquiries.’

The old butler’s face paled.

‘Murdered!’ he repeated in a horrified whisper. ‘It couldn’t be. No
one that knew her could do that. Every one, messieurs, loved Madame.
She was just an angel of goodness.’

The man spoke with real feeling in his voice and seemed overcome with
emotion.

‘Well, messieurs,’ he continued, after a pause, ‘any help I can give
you to get your hands on the murderer I’ll give with real delight,
and I only hope you’ll succeed soon.’

‘I hope so too, François. We’ll do our best anyway. Now, please, will
you answer some questions. You remember M. Boirac being called to the
works on Saturday the 27th of March, the evening of the dinner party,
at about a quarter to nine. That was about the time, wasn’t it?’

‘Yes, monsieur.’

‘He went out at once?’

‘He did, monsieur.’

‘Then he telephoned at about half-past ten that he could not return
until later. Was that about the time?’

‘Rather earlier than that, I should think, monsieur. I don’t remember
exactly, but I should think it was very little, if at all, past ten.’

‘About ten, you think? Can you tell me what words he used in that
message?’

‘He said the accident was serious, and that he would be very late,
and possibly might not get back before the morning.’

‘You told your mistress, I suppose? Did the guests hear you?’

‘No, monsieur, but Madame immediately repeated the message aloud.’

‘What happened then?’

‘Shortly after that, about 11.00 or 11.15, the guests began to leave.’

‘All of them?’

The butler hesitated.

‘There was one, a M. Felix, who waited after the others. He was
differently situated to them, being a friend of the family. The
others were merely acquaintances.’

‘And how long did he wait after the others?’

François looked confused and did not immediately reply.

‘Well, I don’t know, monsieur,’ he said slowly. ‘You see, it was this
way. I happened to have a rather bad headache that evening, and
Madame asked me if I was not well--it was just like her to notice
such a thing--and she told me to go to bed and not to sit up for
Monsieur. She said M. Felix was waiting to get some books and would
let himself out.’

‘So you went to bed?’

‘Yes, monsieur. I thanked her, and went after a little time.’

‘About how long?’

‘Perhaps half an hour.’

‘And had M. Felix gone then?’

‘No, monsieur, not at that time.’

‘And what happened then?’

‘I fell asleep, but woke up suddenly again after about an hour. I
felt better and I thought I would see if Monsieur was in and if
everything was properly locked up. I got up and went towards the
hall, but just as I came to the staircase I heard the front door
close. I thought, ‘That’s Monsieur coming in,’ but there was no sound
of any one moving in the hall and I went down to see.’

‘Yes?’

‘There was no one there, so I looked into the different rooms. They
were all empty, though lighted up. I thought to myself, ‘This is
strange,’ and I went to find Suzanne, Madame’s maid, who was sitting
up for her. I asked her had Madame gone to bed, but she said not.
“Well,” I said, “she’s not downstairs. Better go up and see if she’s
in her room.” She went and came down in a moment looking frightened,
and said the room was empty, but that Madame’s hat and fur coat and a
pair of walking shoes were gone. Her evening shoes that she had been
wearing were lying on the floor, where she had changed them. I went
up myself and we searched around, and then I heard the latch of the
front door again and went down. Monsieur was just coming in and, as I
took his coat and hat, I told him about hearing the door close. He
asked where Madame was, and I answered I did not know. He looked
himself, and in the study he found a note which I suppose was from
her, for after he had read it he asked no more questions, but told me
she had had to go to Switzerland to her mother, who was ill. But I
knew when he got rid of Suzanne two days later that she wasn’t coming
back.’

‘What time did M. Boirac come in?’

‘About one o’clock, or a few minutes after.’

‘Were his hat and coat wet?’

‘Not very wet, monsieur, but he had been evidently walking through
rain.’

‘You didn’t make any further search to see if anything else had been
taken, I suppose?’

‘Yes, monsieur. Suzanne and I searched the entire house most
thoroughly on Sunday.’

‘With no result?’

‘None, monsieur.’

‘I suppose the body could not have been concealed anywhere in the
house?’

The butler started as this new idea struck him.

‘Why, no, monsieur,’ he said, ‘it would have been absolutely
impossible. I myself looked in every spot and opened everything large
enough to contain it.’

‘Thank you, I think that’s about all I want to know. Can you put me
in touch with Suzanne?’

‘I believe I can get you her address, monsieur, from one of the
parlourmaids with whom she was friends.’

‘Please do, and in the meantime we shall have a look through the
house.’

‘You will not require me, monsieur?’

‘No, thanks.’

The plan of the downstairs rooms was simple. The hall, which was long
and rather narrow, stretched back from the entrance door in the rue
St. Jean to the staircase in a direction parallel to the Avenue de
l’Alma. On the right was the drawing-room, a large apartment in the
angle between the two streets, with windows looking out on both.
Across the hall, with its door facing that of the drawing-room, was
the study, another fine room facing on to the rue St. Jean. A small
sitting-room, used chiefly by the late Madame Boirac, and the
dining-room were situated behind the study and the drawing-room
respectively. To the rear of the doors of these latter rooms were the
staircase and servants’ quarters.

The detectives examined these respective rooms in detail. The
furnishing was luxurious and artistic. The drawing-room furniture was
Louis Quatorze, with an Aubusson carpet and some cabinets and tables
of buhl. There was just enough of good Sèvres and Ormolu, the whole
selection of arrangement reflecting the taste of the connoisseur. The
dining-room and boudoir gave the same impression of wealth and
culture, and the detectives as they passed from room to room were
impressed by the excellent taste everywhere exhibited. Though their
search was exhaustive it was unfortunately without result.

The study was a typical man’s room, except in one respect. There was
the usual thick carpet on the floor, the customary book-lined walls,
the elaborate desk in the window, and the huge leather arm-chairs.
But there was also what almost amounted to a collection of
statuary--figures, groups, friezes, plaques, and reliefs, in marble
and bronze. A valuable lot, numerous enough and of sufficient
excellence not to have disgraced the art galleries of a city. M.
Boirac had clearly the knowledge, as well as the means, to indulge
his hobby to a very full extent.

Burnley took his stand inside the door and looked slowly round the
room, taking in its every detail in the rather despairing hope that
he would see something helpful to his quest. Twice he looked at the
various objects before him, observing in the slow, methodical way in
which he had trained himself, making sure that he had a clear mental
conception of each before going on to the next. And then his gaze
became riveted on an object standing on one of the shelves.

It was a white marble group about two feet high of three garlanded
women, two standing and one sitting.

‘I say,’ he said to Lefarge, in a voice of something approaching
triumph, ‘have you heard of anything like that lately?’

There was no reply, and Burnley, who had not been observing his
companion, looked around. Lefarge was on his knees examining with a
lens something hidden among the thick pile of the carpet. He was
entirely engrossed, and did not appear to have heard Burnley’s
remark, but as the latter moved over he rose to his feet with a
satisfied little laugh.

‘Look here!’ he cried. ‘Look at this!’

Stepping back to the cross wall adjoining the door, he crouched down
with his head close to the floor and his eyes fixed on a point on the
carpet in a line between himself and the window.

‘Do you see anything?’ he asked.

Burnley got into the same position, and looked at the carpet.

‘No,’ he answered slowly, ‘I do not.’

‘You’re not far enough this way. Come here. Now look.’

‘Jove!’ Burnley cried, with excitement in his tones. ‘The cask!’

On the carpet, showing up faintly where the light struck it, was a
ring-shaped mark about two feet four inches diameter. The pile was
slightly depressed below the general surface, as might have been
caused by the rim of a heavy cask.

‘I thought so too,’ said Lefarge, ‘but this makes it quite certain.’

He held out his lens, and indicated the part of the floor he had been
scrutinising.

Burnley knelt down and, using the lens, began to push open the
interstices of the pile. They were full of a curious kind of dust. He
picked out some and examined it on his hand.

‘Sawdust!’ he exclaimed.

‘Sawdust,’ returned the other, in a pleased and important tone. ‘See
here,’--he traced a circle on the floor--‘sawdust has been spilled
over all this, and there’s where the cask stood beside it. I tell
you, Burnley, mark my words, we are on to it now. That’s where the
cask stood while Felix, or Boirac, or both of them together, packed
the body into it.’

‘By Jove!’ Burnley cried again, as he turned over this new idea in
his mind. ‘I shouldn’t wonder if you are right!’

‘Of course I’m right. The thing’s as plain as a pike-staff. A woman
disappears and her body is found packed in sawdust in a cask, and
here, in the very house where she vanishes, is the mark of the same
cask--a very unusual size, mind you--as well as traces of the
sawdust.’

‘Ay, it’s likely enough. But I don’t see the way of it for all that.
If Felix did it, how could he have got the cask here and away again?’

‘It was probably Boirac.’

‘But the alibi? Boirac’s alibi is complete.’

‘It’s complete enough, so far as that goes. But how do we know it’s
true? We have had no real confirmation of it so far.’

‘Except from François. If either Boirac or Felix did it, François
must have been in it, too, and that doesn’t strike me as likely.’

‘No, I admit the old chap seems all right. But if they didn’t do it,
how do you account for the cask being here?’

‘Maybe that had something to do with it,’ answered Burnley, pointing
to the marble group.

Lefarge started.

‘But that’s what was sent to Felix, surely?’ he cried, in surprise.

‘It looks like it, but don’t say anything. Here’s François. Let us
ask him.’

The butler entered the room holding a slip of paper which he gave to
Lefarge.

‘Suzanne’s address, messieurs.’ Lefarge read:--


‘Mlle. Suzanne Daudet,

rue Popeau, 14b,

Dijon.’


‘Look here, François,’ said the detective, pointing to the marble
group. ‘When did that come here?’

‘Quite recently, monsieur. As you see, Monsieur is a collector of
such things, and that is, I think, the latest addition.’

‘Can you remember the exact day it arrived?’

‘It was about the time of the dinner-party, in fact, I remember now
distinctly. It was that very day.’

‘How was it packed?’

‘It was in a cask, monsieur. It was left in here that Saturday
morning with the top boards loosened for Monsieur to unpack. He never
would trust any one to do that for him.’

‘Was he, then, in the habit of getting these casks?’

‘Yes, monsieur, a good many of the statues came in casks.’

‘I see. And when was this one unpacked?’

‘Two days later, monsieur, on Monday evening.’

‘And what happened to the cask?’

‘It was returned to the shop. Their cart called for it two or three
days later.’

‘You don’t remember exactly when?’

The butler paused in thought.

‘I do not, monsieur. It was on the Wednesday or Thursday following, I
believe, but I’m not positive.’

‘Thank you, François. There is one other thing I should be greatly
obliged if you could do for me. Get me a sample of Madame’s writing.’

François shook his head.

‘I haven’t such a thing, monsieur,’ he replied, ‘but I can show you
her desk, if you would care to look over it.’

They went into the boudoir, and François pointed out a small
davenport finished with some delicate carving and with inlaid panels,
a beautiful example of the cabinetmaker’s art. Lefarge seated himself
before it and began to go through the papers it contained.

‘Somebody’s been before us,’ he said. ‘There’s precious little here.’

He produced a number of old receipted bills and circulars, with some
unimportant letters and printed papers, but not a scrap in Madame’s
handwriting could he discover.

Suddenly François gave an exclamation.

‘I believe I can get you what you want, messieurs, if you will wait a
moment.’

‘Yes,’ he said, as he returned a few seconds later, ‘this will
perhaps do. It was framed in the servants’ hall.’

It was a short document giving the work of the different servants,
their hours of duty, and other similar information, and was written
in the hand, so far as the detectives could recollect, of the letter
of farewell to M. Boirac. Lefarge put it away carefully in his
notebook.

‘Now let us see Madame’s room.’

They examined the bedroom, looking particularly for old letters, but
without success. Next they interviewed the other servants, also
fruitlessly.

‘All we want now,’ said Lefarge to the old butler, ‘is a list of the
guests at that dinner, or at least some of them.’

‘I can tell you, I think, all of them, monsieur,’ returned François,
and Lefarge noted the names in his book.

‘What time is M. Boirac likely to return?’ asked Burnley, when they
had finished.

‘He should have been here before this, monsieur. He generally gets
back by half-past six.’

It was now nearly seven, and, as they waited, they heard his latchkey
in the door.

‘Ah, messieurs,’ he greeted them, ‘so you are here already. Any luck?’

‘No luck so far, M. Boirac,’ replied Lefarge, continuing after a
pause: ‘There is a point on which we should be obliged for some
information, monsieur. It is about this marble group.’

‘Yes?’

‘Could you tell us the circumstances under which you got it, and of
its arrival here?’

‘Certainly. I am a collector of such articles, as you must have
noticed. Some time ago, in passing Dupierre’s in the Boulevard des
Capucines, I saw that group and admired it greatly. After some
hesitation I ordered it and it arrived--I believe it was the very day
of--of the dinner-party, either that or the day before--I am not
positive. I had the cask containing it brought into the study to
unpack myself--I always enjoy unpacking a new purchase--but I was so
upset by what had happened I hadn’t much heart in doing so. However,
on the following Monday evening, to try and distract my thoughts, I
did unpack it, and there you see the result.’

‘Can you tell me, monsieur,’ asked Burnley, ‘was M. Felix also
interested in such things?’

‘He was. He is an artist and painting is therefore his specialty, but
he had a good knowledge of sculpture also.’

‘He wasn’t interested in that particular group, I suppose?’

‘Well, I can hardly tell you that. I told him about it and described
it to him, but, of course, so far as I am aware he had not seen it.’

‘Did you happen to mention the price?’

‘I did, fourteen hundred francs. That was the thing he specially
asked. That, and the shop at which I had bought it. He said he could
not afford it then, but that at some time he might try and get
another.’

‘Well, I think that’s all we want to know. Our best thanks, M.
Boirac.’

‘Good-evening, messieurs.’

They bowed themselves out, and, walking to the top of the Avenue,
took the Metro to Concorde, from which they passed up the rue
Castiglione to the Grands Boulevards to dine and spend the time until
they were due back at the Sûreté.




CHAPTER XVI

INSPECTOR BURNLEY UP AGAINST IT

At nine o’clock that evening the usual meeting was held in the
Chief’s room at the Sûreté.

‘I also have had some news,’ said M. Chauvet, when he had heard
Burnley’s and Lefarge’s reports. ‘I sent a man up to that pump
manufactory and he found out enough to substantiate entirely Boirac’s
statement of the hours at which he arrived there and left on the
night of the accident. There is also a despatch from Scotland Yard.
On receipt of Mr. Burnley’s wire immediate inquiries were made about
the cask sent by Havre and Southampton. It appears it arrived all
right at Waterloo on the morning after it was despatched from here.
It was booked through, as you know, to an address near Tottenham
Court Road, and the railway people would in the ordinary course have
delivered it by one of their lorries. But just as it was being
removed from the van of the train, a man stepped forward and claimed
it, saying he was the consignee, that he wished to take it to another
address, and that he had a cart and man there for the purpose. He was
a man of about medium height, with dark hair and beard, and the clerk
thought he was a foreigner, probably French. He gave his name as Léon
Felix and produced several envelopes addressed to himself at the
Tottenham Court Road address as identification. He signed for, and
was handed over the cask, and took it away. His movements after that
were completely lost sight of, and no further traces of him have been
discovered. A photo of Felix was shown to the Waterloo people, but
while the clerk said it was like the man, neither he nor any of the
others would swear to it.

‘Inquiries have also been made about Felix. It turns out he is an
artist or designer in Messrs. Greer and Hood’s, the advertisement and
poster people of Fleet Street. He is not married, but keeps an
elderly servant-housekeeper. This woman was on a fortnight’s holiday
from the 25th of March to the 8th of this month.

‘So much for London,’ continued M. Chauvet. ‘Now, let us see what we
have still to do. First, that lady’s maid at Dijon must be
interviewed. I think, Lefarge, you might do that. To-morrow is
Sunday. Suppose you go to-morrow. You can sleep at Dijon, and get
back as early as possible on Monday. Then, Mr. Burnley, that matter
of the statue sent to M. Boirac must be gone into. Perhaps you would
be good enough to make inquiries at Dupierre’s on Monday morning, and
please keep in touch with me by phone. I will look into some other
points, and we shall meet here at the same time that evening.’

The detective took the Metro at Châtelet, Burnley going west to his
hotel in the rue Castiglione, and Lefarge east to the Gare de Lyons.

On Monday morning Burnley called to see M. Thomas at the showroom in
the Boulevard des Capucines.

‘I’m back again, M. Thomas,’ he said, as they greeted one another. He
explained what had been learned about the casks at the Gare St.
Lazare, continuing, ‘So you see, two must have been sent out. Now,
can you give me any information about the sending out of the second
cask?’

‘Absolutely none, monsieur,’ returned Thomas, who was evidently
amazed at this new development, ‘I am quite positive we only sent
one.’

‘I suppose it’s impossible that Felix’s order could have been dealt
with twice in error, once by you here, and once by the head office in
the rue Provence?’

‘I should say quite, because they do not stock the good work there,
it is all stored and dealt with here. But if you like I’ll phone the
head office now, and make quite sure.’

In a few minutes there was a reply from M. Thévenet. No cask of any
kind had been sent out from the rue Provence establishment on or
about the date mentioned, and none at any time to Felix.

‘Well, M. Thomas, it’s certain, is it not? that one of your casks was
sent by Rouen and long sea about the 1st instant. Do you think you
could let me have a list of all the casks of that size that were out
of your yard on that date? It must have been one of them.’

‘Yes, I suppose it must. I think I can give you that information, but
it will take some time to get out.’

‘I’m sorry for giving you the trouble, but I see no other way. We
shall have to follow up each of these casks until we find the right
one.’

M. Thomas promised to put the work in hands without delay, and
Burnley continued:--

‘There is another point. Could you tell me something about your
dealings with M. Raoul Boirac, of the Avenue de l’Alma, and
particularly of any recent sales you made him?’

‘M. Boirac? Certainly. He is a very good customer of ours and a
really well-informed amateur. For the last six years, since I was
appointed manager here, we must have sold him thirty or forty
thousand francs worth of stuff. Every month or two he would drop in,
take a look round, and select some really good piece. We always
advised him of anything new we came across and as often as not he
became a purchaser. Of recent sales,’ M. Thomas consulted some
papers, ‘the last thing we sold him was, curiously enough, the
companion piece of that ordered by Felix. It was a marble group of
three female figures, two standing and one seated. It was ordered on
the 25th of March, and sent out on the 27th.’

‘Was it sent in a cask?’

‘It was. We always use the same packing.’

‘And has the cask been returned?’

M. Thomas rang for a clerk and asked for some other papers.

‘Yes,’ he said, when he had looked over them, ‘the cask sent to M.
Boirac on the 27th of last month was returned here on the 1st
instant.’

‘One other point, M. Thomas. How can one distinguish between the two
groups, that sent to M. Felix, and that to M. Boirac?’

‘Very easily. Both consist of three female figures, but in M. Felix’s
two were seated and one standing, while in M. Boirac’s two were
standing and one seated.’

‘Thank you very much. That’s all I want.’

‘Not at all. Where shall I send that list of casks?’

‘To the Sûreté, if you please,’ and with a further exchange of
compliments the two men parted.

Burnley was both mystified and somewhat disappointed by the
information M. Thomas had given him. He had been really impressed by
Lefarge’s discovery that a cask containing sawdust had recently been
opened in M. Boirac’s study, though he had not admitted it at the
time. His friend’s strongly expressed opinion that either Felix or
Boirac, or both, had at that time packed the body in the cask had
seemed more and more likely, the longer he had thought it over. There
were, however, difficulties in the theory. First, as he had pointed
out to Lefarge, there was the personality of François. He felt he
would stake his reputation on François’ innocence, and without the
butler’s co-operation he did not see how the murder could have been
carried through. Then, what possible motive could either of the men
named have had for desiring the death of the lady? These and other
difficulties he had foreseen, but he had not considered them
insuperable. Possibly, in spite of them, they were on the right
track. But now all hopes of that were dashed. The explanation of M.
Boirac of the presence of the cask was complete, and it had been
confirmed by François. This perhaps was not conclusive, but M. Thomas
had confirmed it also, and Burnley felt the evidence of its truth was
overwhelming. The body could not therefore have been packed in the
cask, because it had been returned direct from M. Boirac’s to the
showrooms. Reluctantly he felt Lefarge’s theory must be abandoned,
and, what was much worse, he had no other to substitute.

Another point struck him. If he could find out the hour at which
Felix had reached his hotel on the fatal evening, and his condition
on arrival, it might confirm or disprove some of the statements they
had heard. Therefore, having phoned to the Sûreté and finding he was
not required there, he turned his steps again to the Hotel
Continental and asked for the manager.

‘I’m afraid I am back to give more trouble, monsieur,’ he said, as
they met, ‘but one point has arisen upon which we want some
information.’

‘I shall be pleased to assist you as far as I can.’

‘We want to know at what hour M. Felix returned to the hotel on the
night of Saturday fortnight, the 27th March, and his condition on
arrival. Can you get us that?’

‘I’ll make inquiries. Excuse me a moment.’

The manager was gone a considerable time. When he returned after more
than half an hour he shook his head.

‘I can’t find out,’ he said. ‘I’ve asked every one I can think of,
but no one knows. One of the hall porters was on duty that evening up
till midnight, and he is positive he did not come in before that
hour. This is a very reliable man and I think you may take what he
says as accurate. The man who relieved him is off duty at present, as
is also the night lift boy, and the chamber-maid on late duty in M.
Felix’s corridor, but I will interview them later and let you know
the result. I presume that will be time enough?’

‘Certainly,’ and with thanks Burnley withdrew.

He lunched alone, greatly regretting M. Lefarge’s absence, and then
called up the Sûreté again. M. Chauvet wanted to speak to him, he was
told, and soon he was switched through to the great man’s private
room.

‘There has been another wire from London,’ said the distant voice,
‘and it seems a cask was sent by passenger train from Charing Cross
to Paris via Dover and Calais on Thursday week, the 1st of April,
consigned to M. Jaques de Belleville, from Raymond Lemaître. I think
you had better go to the Gare du Nord and find out something about
it.’

‘How many more casks are we going to find?’ thought the puzzled
Burnley, as he drove in the direction of the station. As the taxi
slipped through the crowded streets he again took stock of his
position, and had to admit himself completely at sea. The information
they gained--and there was certainly plenty coming in--did not work
into a connected whole, but each fresh piece of evidence seemed, if
not actually to conflict with some other, at least to add to the
tangle to be straightened out. When in England he had thought Felix
innocent. Now he was beginning to doubt this conclusion.

He had not Lefarge’s card to show to the clerk in the parcels office,
but fortunately the latter remembered him as having been with the
French detective on their previous call.

‘Yes,’ he said, when Burnley had explained, in his somewhat halting
French, what he wanted, ‘I can tell you about that cask.’ He turned
up some papers.

‘Here we are,’ he said. ‘The cask came off the Calais boat train at
5.45 p.m. on Thursday week, the 1st instant. It was consigned from
Charing Cross to M. Jaques de Belleville, to be kept here until
called for. He claimed it personally almost immediately after, and
removed it on a cart he had brought.’

‘Can you describe M. de Belleville?’

‘He was of medium height and dark, with a black beard. I did not take
special notice of him.’

Burnley produced a photograph of Felix he had received from London.

‘Is that the man?’ he asked, handing it over.

The clerk scrutinised it carefully.

‘I could hardly say,’ he replied hesitatingly, ‘it’s certainly like
my recollection of him, but I am not sure. Remember I only saw him
once, and that about ten days ago.’

‘Of course, you could hardly be expected to remember. Can you tell me
another thing? What time did he take the cask away?’

‘I can tell you that because I book off duty at 5.15, and I waited
five minutes after that to finish the business. He left at 5.20
exactly.’

‘I suppose there was nothing that attracted your attention about the
cask, nothing to differentiate it from other casks?’

‘As a matter of fact,’ returned the clerk, ‘there were two things.
First, it was exceedingly well and strongly made and bound with
thicker iron hoops than any I had previously seen, and secondly, it
was very heavy. It took two men to get it from here to the cart that
M. de Belleville had brought.’

‘You didn’t notice any lettering on it, other than the labels?’

‘I did,’ he answered, ‘there was “Return to” in French, English, and
German, and the name of a Paris firm.’

‘Do you recollect the name?’

The young man paused in thought.

‘No, monsieur,’ he replied, after a few seconds, ‘I regret to say I
have quite forgotten it.’

‘I suppose you wouldn’t recognise it if you heard it? It was not, for
example, Messrs. Dupierre, the monumental sculptors, of Grenelle?’

The clerk hesitated again.

‘Possibly it was, monsieur, but I fear I could not say definitely.’

‘Well, I am greatly obliged for what you have told me, any way. Just
one other question. What was in the cask?’

‘It was invoiced _Statuary_, but of course I did not see it opened,
and don’t know if the description was correct.’

Burnley thanked the young man and turned out of the great station.
Certainly it sounded as if this was a similar cask to that he had
taken to Scotland Yard, if it was not the same one. Of course, he had
to remember that even if it were one of Messrs. Dupierre’s, which was
not proven, there were a large number of these casks in circulation,
and it did not follow that this one was connected with his quest. But
the whole circumstances gave him to think, and he felt that his
bewilderment was not lessened by the new development. As he walked
slowly down the rue de Lafayette towards his hotel, he racked his
brains in the endeavour to piece together into a connected whole the
various facts he had learnt. He strolled on into the Tuileries and,
choosing a quiet spot under a tree, sat down to think the matter out.

And first, as to these mysterious journeyings of casks. He went over
the three in his mind. First, there was the cask sent out by Messrs.
Dupierre on the Tuesday evening after the dinner-party, which
travelled via Havre and Southampton, and which was received at
Waterloo on the following morning by a black-bearded man, believed to
have been Felix. That cask was addressed to Felix and it contained a
statue. Then there was the second cask, sent out from Paris two days
later--on the Thursday evening--which went via Rouen and long sea,
and which was undoubtedly received at St. Katherine’s Docks by Felix.
This number two cask contained the body of Madame Annette Boirac. And
finally, there was what he might call number three cask, which was
sent from London to Paris on that same Thursday, and which was
claimed on arrival at the Gare du Nord by a M. Jaques de Belleville.
This cask, like both the others, was labelled ‘Statuary,’ but whether
that was really its contents was not known.

The Inspector lit one of his strong cigars and puffed thoughtfully,
as he turned these journeys over in his mind. He could not but think
there was some connection between them, though at first he could not
trace it. Then it occurred to him that if they were considered, not
in the order of their discovery, but chronologically, some light
might be gained. He went over them anew. The first journey was still
that from Paris to London via Havre and Southampton, leaving Paris on
Tuesday night and arriving at Waterloo on Wednesday morning. The
second was now that leaving London on Thursday morning and reaching
Paris that afternoon, via Dover and Calais, and the third that from
Paris to London via Rouen, leaving on that same Thursday evening, and
arriving at St. Katherine’s Docks on the following Monday. That is,
from Paris to London, back from London to Paris, and back again from
Paris to London. This seemed to show an element of design. And then a
possible connection flashed across his mind. Instead of three casks
might there not have been only one? Did the same cask not travel in
each case?

The more Burnley thought over this, the more likely it seemed. This
would explain M. Thomas’s statement that only one cask had been sent
out. It would make clear how the cask containing the body had been
obtained. It would account for the astonishing coincidence that three
casks of this unusual kind had made three such journeys almost at the
same time.

Yes, it seemed probable. But if so, at some point in that triple
journey the cask must have been opened, the statue removed, and the
body substituted. The evidence was overwhelming that the cask had
contained a statue when it left the Boulevard des Capucines yard, and
that it had not been tampered with till it reached the van of the
7.47 p.m. from the Gare St. Lazare to Havre. Further, it had
contained the body on arrival at St. Katherine’s Docks, and here
again there was evidence that it could not have been opened in the
hold of the _Bullfinch_. Therefore, at some point along the route,
Gare St. Lazare, Havre, Southampton, Waterloo, Charing Cross, Dover,
Calais, Gare du Nord, rue Cardinet goods station, Rouen, the change
must have been made. Burnley made a mental note that every part of
that journey must be the subject of the closest inquiry.

He went a step further. At the end of each of the three journeys it
was met by a middle-sized, black-bearded, French-looking man. In the
case of the third journey that man was Felix. In the two earlier, his
identity was not definitely known, but he was like Felix. Suppose it
was Felix in each case, would not this also tend to prove there was
only one cask, and that Felix was sending it backwards and forwards
with some design of his own? The Inspector felt sure that he was
right so far.

But if Felix had acted in this way, it followed that either he was
the murderer and wished to get the body to his house to dispose of it
there, or else he was an innocent man upon whom the real criminal
wished to plant the corpse. This latter idea had been growing in the
Inspector’s mind for some time. It seemed to hinge very much on the
question, Did Felix know what was in the cask when he met it at St.
Katherine’s Docks? Burnley recalled the scene at Scotland Yard when
it was opened. Either Felix was an incomparable actor, or else he did
not know. Burnley doubted even whether any acting could have been so
realistic. He remembered also that Felix’s illness from the shock was
genuine. No, he rather believed Felix knew nothing of the corpse and,
if so, he must be innocent. The point was one Burnley felt he could
not settle alone. They must have medical evidence.

But if Felix was innocent, who was likely to be guilty? Who else
could have had any motive to kill this lady? What could that motive
have been, in any case? He could not tell. No evidence had yet come
to light to suggest the motive.

His thoughts turned from the motive to the manner of the crime.
Strangulation was an unusual method. It was, moreover, a horrible
method, ghastly to witness and comparatively slow in accomplishment.
Burnley could not imagine any one, no matter how brutal, deliberately
adopting it and carrying it out in cold blood. No, this was a crime
of passion. Some of the elemental forces of love and hate were
involved. Jealousy, most probably. He considered it in his careful,
methodical way. Yes, jealousy certainly seemed the most likely motive.

And then another point struck him. Surely strangulation would only be
adopted, even in the heat of passion, if no other method was
available. If a man about to commit a murder had a weapon in his
hand, he would use it. Therefore, thought Burnley, in this case the
murderer could have had no weapon. And if he had no weapon, what
followed from that? Why, that the crime was unpremeditated. If the
affair had been planned, a weapon would have been provided.

It seemed, therefore, probably that the crime was not deliberate and
cold-blooded. Some one, when alone with Madame, had been suddenly and
unexpectedly roused to a pitch of furious, overmastering passion. And
here again, what more likely to cause this passion than acute
jealousy?

The Inspector lit another cigar, as he continued his train of
thought. If the motive was what he suspected, who would be a likely
person to feel jealousy in reference to Madame? A former lover, he
thought. So far they knew of none, and Burnley took a mental note
that inquiries must be made to ascertain if such existed. Failing a
former lover, the husband immediately came into his mind, and here he
seemed on firmer ground. If Madame had had an understanding with
Felix, and Boirac had come to know of it, there was the motive at
once. Jealousy was what one would naturally expect Boirac to feel
under such circumstances. There was no doubt that, so far as the
facts had as yet come to light, Boirac’s guilt was a possibility they
must not overlook.

The Inspector then turned his thoughts to a general review of the
whole case. He was a great believer in getting things on paper.
Taking out his notebook, he proceeded to make a list of the facts so
far as they were known, in the order of their occurrence,
irrespective of when they were discovered.

First of all was the dinner party at M. Boirac’s, which took place on
Saturday evening, the 27th of March. At this Felix was present, and,
when Boirac was called away to his works, he remained behind, alone
with Madame Boirac, after the other guests had left. He was alone
with her from 11.00 p.m. till at least 11.30, on the evidence of
François. About one in the morning, François heard the front door
close, and, coming down, found that both Felix and Madame had
disappeared. Madame had changed her shoes and taken a coat and hat.
On Boirac’s return, a few minutes later, he found a note from his
wife stating that she had eloped with Felix. Felix was believed to
have gone to London next day, this having been stated by the manager
of the Hotel Continental, as well as by Felix to his friend Martin
outside the house when Constable Walker was listening in the lane. On
that Sunday or the Monday following, a letter, apparently written by
Felix, was posted in London. It contained an order on Messrs.
Dupierre to send a certain group of statuary to that city. This
letter was received by the firm on Tuesday. On the same day, Tuesday,
the statue was packed in a cask and despatched to London via Havre
and Southampton. It reached Waterloo on the following morning, and
was removed from there by a man who claimed to be Felix, and probably
was. The next morning, Thursday, a similar cask was despatched from
Charing Cross to the Gare du Nord in Paris, being met by a man giving
his name as Jaques de Belleville, but who was probably Felix. The
same evening, some fifty minutes later, a similar cask was delivered
at the goods station of the State Railway in the rue Cardinet, for
despatch to London via Rouen and long sea. Next day, Friday, Felix
stated he received a typewritten letter purporting to be from Le
Gautier, telling about the lottery and the bet, stating the cask was
being sent by long sea, and asking him to get it to his house. On the
following morning, Saturday, he had a card from the same source,
saying the cask had left, and on Monday, the 5th of April, he got the
cask from the _Bullfinch_ at St. Katherine’s Docks, and took it home.

Burnley’s list then read as follows:--


    _Saturday, March 27._--Dinner at M. Boirac’s. Madame disappears.

    _Sunday, March 28._--Felix believed to cross to London.

    _Monday, March 29._--Felix writes to Dupierre, ordering statue.

    _Tuesday, March 30._--Order received by Dupierre. Statue
         despatched via Havre and Southampton.

    _Wednesday, March 31._--Cask claimed at Waterloo, apparently
         by Felix.

    _Thursday, April 1._--Cask sent from Charing Cross. Cask met
         at Gare du Nord. Cask delivered at rue Cardinet goods
         station for despatch to London.

    _Friday, April 2._--Felix receives Le Gautier’s letter.

    _Saturday, April 3._--Felix receives Le Gautier’s card.

    _Monday, April 5._--Felix meets cask at docks.


Some other points he added below, which did not fall into the
chronological scheme.


    1. The typescript letter produced by Felix purporting to be
       from Le Gautier about the lottery, the bet, and the test
       with the cask, and the typescript slip in the cask about
       the return of a £50 loan, were done by the same machine,
       on the same paper.

    2. The letter from Felix to Dupierre, ordering the statue
       was written on the same paper as the above, pointing to a
       common origin for the three.


Pleased with the progress he had made, Burnley left his seat under
the tree and strolled back to his hotel in the rue Castiglione to
write his daily report to Scotland Yard.




CHAPTER XVII

A COUNCIL OF WAR

At nine that evening, Inspector Burnley knocked at the door of the
Chief’s room in the Sûreté. Lefarge was already there, and, as
Burnley sat down, M. Chauvet said:--

‘Lefarge is just going to tell his adventures. Now, Lefarge, if you
please.’

‘As arranged on Saturday,’ began the detective, ‘I went to Dijon
yesterday and called on Mlle. Daudet in the rue Popeau. She seems a
quiet, reliable girl, and, I think, truthful. She corroborated M.
Boirac’s and the butler’s statements on every point, but added three
details they omitted. The first was that Mme. Boirac took a
wide-brimmed hat, but no hatpins. This seemed to strike the girl as
very strange, and I asked why. She said because the hat was useless
without the pins, as it would not stay on. I suggested the lady must
have been so hurried she forgot them, but the girl did not think that
possible. She said it would have taken no appreciable time to get the
pins, as they were stuck in the cushion at Madame’s hand, and that a
lady would put in hatpins quite automatically and as a matter of
habit. In fact, had they been forgotten, the loose feel of the hat,
even in the slight air caused by descending the stairs, would have at
once called attention to the omission. She could offer no explanation
of the circumstance. The second detail was that Madame took no
luggage--not even a handbag with immediate necessaries for the night.
The third seems more important still. On the morning of the
dinner-party Madame sent Suzanne to the Hotel Continental with a note
for Felix. Felix came out and instructed her to tell Madame he had
her note and would come.’

‘A curious point, that about the pins,’ said the Chief, and, after a
few moments’ silence, he turned to Burnley and asked for his report.
When this had been delivered and discussed he went on:--

‘I also have some news. There has been a telephone call from the
manager of the Hotel Continental. He says it can be established
beyond doubt that Felix returned to the hotel at 1.30 on Sunday
morning. He was seen by the hall porter, the lift boy, and the
chamber-maid, all of whom are agreed on the time. All three also
agree that he was in a quite normal condition, except that he was in
a specially good humour and seemed pleased about something. The
manager points out, however, that he was habitually good-humoured, so
that there may be nothing remarkable about this.’

M. Chauvet took some cigars from a drawer and, having selected one,
passed the box to the others.

‘Help yourselves, gentlemen. It seems to me that at this stage we
should stop and see just where we stand, what we have learnt, if we
have any tenable theory, and what still remains to be done. I am sure
each of us has already done this, but three minds are better together
than separate. What do you say, Mr. Burnley?’

‘An excellent idea, monsieur,’ returned the Inspector, congratulating
himself on his cogitations earlier in the day.

‘Perhaps you would tell us how you approached the problem, and we
shall add our ideas as you go on?’

‘I started, monsieur, with the assumption that the murder was the
central factor of the whole affair, and the other incidents merely
parts of a design to get rid of the body and divert suspicion.’

‘I fancy we are all agreed there, eh, Lefarge?’

The Frenchman bowed, and Burnley continued:--

‘I thought then of the method of the murder. Strangulation is such a
brutal way of killing that it seemed the work either of a maniac, or
a man virtually mad from passion. Even then it would hardly have been
used if other means had been available. From that I argued the crime
must have been unpremeditated. If it had been planned, a weapon would
have been provided.’

‘A good point, Mr. Burnley. I also had come to the same conclusion.
Please continue.’

‘If this was so, it followed that some person, when alone with Mme.
Boirac, had suddenly been overcome with absolute, blind passion.
What, I asked myself, could have aroused this?

‘A love affair, causing hate or jealousy, naturally suggested itself,
but I could not fit it in. Who could have felt these passions?

‘Considering Felix first, I did not see how he could experience
either hate or jealousy against a woman who had eloped with him. It
is true, a lover’s quarrel might have taken place, resulting in
something approaching temporary hatred, but it was inconceivable this
would be bitter enough to lead to such a climax. Jealousy, I did not
believe could be aroused at all. It seemed to me that Felix would be
the last man in the world to commit the crime.

‘Then it occurred to me that hate and jealousy would be just what one
might expect to find in Boirac’s case. If he were guilty, the motive
would be obvious. And then, when M. Lefarge discovered yesterday that
a cask similar to that in which the body was found had been unpacked
in Boirac’s study, I felt sure this was the solution. However, since
hearing the explanation of the presence of that cask, I admit I am
again in doubt.’

‘I agree with all you say, Mr. Burnley, except that we should
remember that the passions of hate and jealousy could only arise in
Boirac’s mind in a certain circumstance, namely, that he was aware
his wife had eloped, or was about to elope, with Felix. If he were in
ignorance of that, it is obvious he could have had no such feelings.’

‘That is so, sir. Yes, it would only be if he knew.’

‘And then, again, it would only be if he really loved his wife. If
not, he might be vastly annoyed and upset, but not enough to throttle
her in the blind passion we have spoken of. If they were not on good
terms, or if there was some other woman in Boirac’s life, he might
even view her action with delight, as a welcome relief, particularly
as there were no children to complicate the question of a divorce.’
The Chief looked inquiringly at his companions.

‘I agree with that too, sir,’ said Burnley, answering the look.

‘And I, monsieur,’ added Lefarge.

‘So then, we have reached this point. If Boirac was in love with his
wife, and if he knew she had eloped or was about to do so, he would
have had a motive for the crime. Otherwise, we can suggest no motive
at all, either for him, or Felix, or anybody else.’

‘Your last words, monsieur, open up possibilities,’ observed Lefarge.
‘Might it not have been some other person altogether? I do not see
that we are limited to Felix or Boirac. What about Le Gautier, for
instance, or some one we have not yet heard of?’

‘Quite so, Lefarge. That is undoubtedly a possibility. There are
others, François, the butler, for example, into whose actions we must
inquire. The possibility of Madame’s having had some former lover
must not be forgotten either. But I think we should make up our minds
about these two men before we go farther afield.’

‘There is another point,’ resumed Burnley. ‘The medical evidence
shows that only a short time can have elapsed between the time Madame
left her house and the murder. We assume, on the hotel manager’s
testimony, Felix went to London the morning after the dinner-party.
If so, did Madame accompany him? If the former, it points to Felix,
and if the latter, to Boirac.’

‘I think we can deduce that,’ said Lefarge.

‘And how?’

‘In this way, monsieur. Leave aside for a moment the question of the
identity of the murderer, and consider how he got the body into the
cask. This cask we have traced fairly well. It was packed in the
showrooms in the Boulevard des Capucines, and in it was placed a
statue. Then it travelled to Waterloo, and the evidence that it was
not tampered with _en route_ is overwhelming. Therefore the body was
not in it when it arrived at Waterloo. Then, for twenty-two hours, it
disappeared. It reappeared at Charing Cross, for it is too much to
suppose there are really two casks in question, and travelled back to
Paris, and again it is quite impossible that it could have been
interfered with on the journey. At Paris it left the Gare du Nord at
5.20, and disappeared again, but it turned up at the State Railway
goods station at 6.10 p.m. the same evening, and returned to London
by long sea. On arrival in London it contained the body. It is
certain the change was not made during any of the three journeys,
therefore it must have been done during these disappearances in
London or Paris.

‘Of these disappearances, take that in Paris first. It lasted fifty
minutes, and, during that time, the cask was conveyed between the
Gare du Nord and the rue Cardinet goods station on a horse cart. How
long, monsieur, should that journey have taken?’

‘About fifty minutes, I should think,’ returned the Chief.

‘I thought so too. That is to say, the whole time of the
disappearance is accounted for. We may reckon, also, it would take
some considerable time to open, unpack, repack, and close the cask,
and it seems to me it would have been utterly impossible for it to
have _both_ been opened and to have made that journey in the time. It
made the journey, therefore it wasn’t opened. Therefore the body must
have been put into it in London.’

‘Excellent, Lefarge. I believe you are right.’

‘There is a further point, monsieur. If my suggestion is correct, it
definitely proves Madame Boirac went to London while alive, because
her dead body obviously could not have been brought there. If we
consider this in relation to the point about the medical evidence
raised by Mr. Burnley, I think we shall be forced to conclude she
crossed with Felix on Sunday.’

‘It certainly sounds probable.’

‘If she crossed with Felix, it seems almost certain that he is the
guilty man. But there are a good many others things that point to
Felix. Suppose for a moment he is guilty, and picture him faced with
the question of how to dispose of the body. He wants a receptacle to
remove it in. It suddenly occurs to him that only a few hours before
he has seen the very thing. A cask for statuary. And, fortunately for
him, he has not only seen it, but he has learned where to get a
similar cask. What does he do? He proceeds to get that similar cask.
He writes to the firm who use them, and he orders just such a piece
of statuary as will ensure his getting the kind of cask he wants.’

‘What about the false address?’

‘Of that, monsieur, I cannot suggest the explanation, but I presume
it was with some idea of covering his tracks.’

‘Please continue.’

‘I suggest then, that he got the cask on arrival in London, brought
it to St. Malo, unpacked and probably destroyed the statue, packed
the body, took the cask to Charing Cross and sent it to Paris,
travelling over in the same train himself. In Paris he got a cart,
and took it from the Gare du Nord to the rue Cardinet goods station,
travelled back to London, and met the cask at St. Katherine’s Docks
on the following Monday.’

‘But what was the object of all these journeys? If his purpose was to
get rid of the body, why would he first get rid of it, and then
arrange an elaborate scheme to bring it back again?’

‘I saw that difficulty, monsieur,’ admitted Lefarge, ‘and I cannot
explain it, though I would suggest it was for the same purpose as the
false address--in some way to divert suspicion. But more than that,
monsieur. We have evidence that the black-bearded man who met the
cask on its various journeys was like Felix. But we have so far found
no other black-bearded man in the entire case. It seems to me,
therefore, it must have been Felix.’

‘If M. Lefarge’s theory is correct,’ interposed Burnley, ‘the letter
about the bet must have been written by Felix. In this case, could
this letter and the journeys of the cask not have been devised with
the object of throwing suspicion on Le Gautier?’

‘Or on Boirac?’ suggested the Chief.

‘Boirac!’ cried Lefarge, with a rapid gesture of satisfaction. ‘That
was it, of course! I see it now. The whole of the business of the
letter and the cask was a plant designed by Felix to throw suspicion
on Boirac. What do you think, monsieur?’

‘It certainly presents a working theory.’

‘But why,’ queried the Englishman, ‘should Le Gautier’s name be
brought in? Why did he not use Boirac’s?’

‘It would have been too obvious,’ returned Lefarge, delighted with
the rapid strides his theory was making. ‘It would have been crude.
Felix would argue that if Boirac had written that letter, he would
never have signed it himself. It was a subtle idea introducing Le
Gautier’s name.

‘If Felix did it,’ Burnley continued, ‘it would certainly clear up
the difficulty of the authorship of the letter. He is the only man we
have discovered so far that would have had the necessary knowledge to
write it. He was present at the Café Toisson d’Or, and had joined
with Le Gautier in the lottery, and therefore knew that part of it.
The discussion about criminals evading the police and the bet between
Le Gautier and Dumarchez, neither of which we believe took place, he
could have invented to account for the receipt of the cask, and
finally, he would naturally know the details about the last journey
of the cask, since he himself arranged them.’

‘Quite so,’ cried Lefarge eagerly, ‘it all works in. I believe we are
beginning to see light. And we must not forget Suzanne’s evidence
about the note. It is clear Madame and Felix had an understanding for
that night. At least, we know of messages passing between them and
the reply of Felix points to an assignation.’

‘An important point, certainly. And yet,’ the Chief objected, ‘there
are difficulties. That singular point about the hatpins, for example.
What do you make of that, Lefarge?’

‘Agitation, monsieur. I would suggest that this lady was so excited
at the action she was about to take that she hardly knew what she was
doing.’

The Chief shook his head.

‘I don’t know that that is very satisfactory,’ he said. ‘Might it
not, as also the fact that she took no luggage, mean that she never
left the house at all? That she was murdered that same evening of the
dinner-party, and the hat and coat removed to make a false scent? I
suppose you have considered that?’

Burnley answered at once.

‘I thought of that first of all, monsieur, but I dismissed it as
impossible for the following reasons. First, if she was murdered on
Saturday night, what was done with the body? It could not have been
put into the cask in the study, as I had thought at first, for that
was full. The statue was not unpacked till two nights later, on
Monday. We know, indeed, it was not put into the cask, for that was
returned direct to Messrs. Dupierre’s and found to be empty.
Secondly, it could not have been hidden anywhere else in the house,
for François and Suzanne made a thorough search on the Sunday, and
the corpse would have been too big a thing for them to have
overlooked. Further, if she was murdered in the house, either Felix,
Boirac, or some third person or persons must have done it. Felix
could hardly be the man, as I do not see how he could have removed
the body without a confederate, and we have not found such. Boirac
would perhaps have had more chances of disposing of the body, though
I do not see how, but he had a complete alibi. Lastly, I felt
strongly that François, the butler, was to be believed. I could not
imagine him party to the murder, and I did not see how it could have
been done at the time you suggest without his knowledge.’

‘That certainly seems probable. In fact, when you add it to M.
Lefarge’s point that the body must have been put into the cask in
London, it seems to me almost conclusive.’

‘I also feel sure it could not have been done then,’ observed
Lefarge, ‘though I don’t agree with Mr. Burnley that Boirac’s alibi
is good.’

‘Well now, I was rather inclined to accept the alibi,’ said M.
Chauvet. ‘What part of it do you consider doubtful, Lefarge?’

‘All of it from the time Boirac left the works. We don’t know whether
that American exists at all. As far as I can see, the whole thing may
be an invention.’

‘That is quite true,’ admitted the Chief, ‘but it didn’t seem to me
so very important. The crucial point, to my mind, is the hour at
which Boirac says he returned home--a few minutes past one. That is
confirmed by François and by Suzanne, and I think we may accept their
statement. But we have a further rather convincing incident. You may
recollect Boirac stated that when he was halfway home from the Gare
Quai d’Orsay it began to rain? You very properly tried to check even
so small a point by asking François if his master’s coat was wet. He
replied that it was. Now, I made inquiries, and I find that night was
perfectly fine till almost one o’clock, when a thick, wetting rain
began to fall. We know, therefore, quite definitely that Boirac was
out until the time he said. Therefore he could not have done the deed
before 1.15. Also, we know that he could not have done it after that
hour, because the lady was gone, and also the butler and maid were
about. Therefore, if Boirac did it at all, it must have been after
that night.’

‘That seems unquestionable, monsieur,’ said Lefarge, ‘and when you
add to that the fact that we have, so far at any rate, been quite
unable to connect Boirac with the letter or the cask, and that we are
practically certain Madame travelled to London, I think he may almost
be eliminated from the inquiry. What do you say, Burnley?’

‘Well, I think it’s a little so soon to eliminate any one from
inquiry. I confess that point of motive struck me as being very
strong against Boirac.’

‘That also, by the way, seems to show the deed was not done by Boirac
that night,’ the Chief went on. ‘Your point is that he killed his
wife because she had run away with Felix. But if he came home and
found her there, she obviously _hadn’t_ run away. Hence the motive,
for that night at least, falls to the ground.’

The three men laughed, and M. Chauvet resumed:--

‘Now, to sum up our present position. We know that Mme. Boirac was
murdered between 11.30 p.m. on the Saturday of the dinner-party, and
the following Monday evening, when the letter purporting to be from
Felix and ordering the statue, was written. Obviously only Felix,
Boirac, or some third person could be guilty. There is not, so far, a
scintilla of evidence of any third person being involved, therefore
it almost certainly was one of the other two. Taking Boirac first, we
find that under certain circumstances he would have had a motive for
the crime, but we have not yet been able to obtain any evidence that
these circumstances existed. Apart from this, we can find nothing
whatever against him. On the other hand, he has established a strong
alibi for the only time during which, so far as we can now see, he
could have committed the crime.

‘Against Felix there are several suspicious circumstances. Firstly,
it is proved he received a note from Madame, presumably arranging a
meeting. Then we know he took advantage of the husband’s absence on
the night of the dinner to have a private interview with her. That
went on from 11.00 till at least 11.30, and there is reason to
believe, though not proof, till 1.00. Then we believe Madame went to
London, either actually with Felix, or at the same time. We conclude
that for three reasons. First, she wrote to her husband that she had
done so. The value of this evidence will, of course, depend on the
opinion of our handwriting experts, whose report on the genuineness
of this letter we have not yet received. Second, she could not have
remained in the house, either alive or dead, as it was thoroughly
searched by the servants, who found no trace of her. Neither could
her body have been put in the cask in the study, for that contained
the statue, and was not unpacked till the following Monday evening.
Third, it is certain from the journeyings of the cask that the body
was put into it in London, for the simple reason that it could not
have been done anywhere else. Therefore she must have travelled to
that city.

‘Further, the letter presumed to be written to Felix by Le Gautier
could be reasonably accounted for if Felix himself wrote it as a
blind to cover his actions with the cask, should such be discovered.
It is clear that it was written with some such purpose, as half of
it--all about the bet and the test--is entirely untrue, and evidently
invented to account for the arrival of the cask. Now, we may take it,
Le Gautier did not write that letter. On the other hand, Felix is the
only man we have yet found who had sufficient information to do so.

‘Again, we know that a black-bearded man like Felix arranged the
journeys of the cask. So far, Felix himself is the only black-bearded
man we have found. On the other hand we have two strong points in
Felix’s favour. First, we have not been able to prove motive, and
second, his surprise when the body was found in the cask appears to
have been genuine. We have undoubtedly a good deal of evidence
against Felix, but we must note that not only is this evidence
circumstantial, but there is also evidence in his favour.

‘The truth is, in my opinion, that we have not yet sufficient
information to come to a conclusion, and I fear it will take a lot of
work to get it. Firstly, we must definitely prove the authorship of
that letter about the lottery and the bet. And here, it seems to me,
the tracing of that typewriter is essential. This should not be so
difficult, as I think we may take it that the author used the
typewriter himself. Therefore, only machines to which the possible
writers could have had access need be examined. I will send a man
to-morrow to get samples from all the machines Boirac could have
used, and if that produces nothing, he can do the same in connection
with Le Gautier, Dumarchez, and the other gentlemen whose names we
have. I presume, Mr. Burnley, your people will take similar action
with regard to Felix?’

‘I expect they have done so already, but I will write to-night and
make sure.’

‘I consider that a vital point, and the next is almost equally
important. We must trace Felix’s movements from the Saturday night
till the Thursday evening when the cask containing the body was
despatched from Paris. Further, we must ascertain by direct evidence,
if Madame travelled with him to London.

‘We must similarly trace the movements of Boirac for the same period.
If none of these inquiries help us, other points would be the
confronting of Felix and Boirac with the various luggage clerks that
did business with the black-bearded man with the cask, in the hope
that some of them might possibly identify him. The tracing of the
carters who brought the cask to and from the various stations might
or might not lead us to the men from whom they got their
instructions. An exhaustive inquiry into the past life of Mme. Boirac
and all the suspected men is also likely to be necessary. There are
several other directions in which we can prosecute inquiries, but I
fancy the above should give us all we want.’

The discussion was carried on for some time longer, various points of
detail being more fully gone into. Finally, it was arranged that on
the following morning Burnley and Lefarge should begin the tracing of
Felix’s movements from the night of the dinner-party until he left
French soil, after which Burnley would continue the quest alone,
while Lefarge turned his attention to ascertaining Boirac’s movements
during the crucial period.




CHAPTER XVIII

LEFARGE HUNTS ALONE

At nine o’clock next morning the two colleagues met at the hotel in
the rue Castiglione. They had discussed their plan of campaign before
separating the previous evening, and did not waste time getting to
work. Calling a taxi, they drove once more to the Hotel Continental
and asked for their old friend the manager. In a few minutes they
were ushered into the presence of that urbane and smiling, but
somewhat bored official.

‘We are exceedingly sorry to trouble you again, monsieur,’ apologised
Lefarge, ‘but the fact is we find we require some more information
about your recent visitor, M. Felix. If you can help us to obtain it,
you will greatly add to our already large debt of gratitude.’

The manager bowed.

‘I shall be delighted to tell you anything I can. What is the point
in question?’

‘We want to trace M. Felix’s movements after he left here. You have
already told us he went to catch the 8.20 English boat train at the
Gare du Nord. We wondered if he really did travel by it. Can you help
us to find out?’

‘Our bus meets all the incoming boat trains, but attends only those
outward bound by which visitors are travelling. If you will pardon me
a moment, I will ascertain if it ran that day. It was Sunday, I
think?’

‘Sunday, the 28th March.’

The manager was absent for a few moments, returning with a tall young
man in the uniform of a porter.

‘I find the bus did run on the day in question, and Karl, here, went
with it. He may be able to answer your questions.’

‘Thank you, monsieur.’ Lefarge turned to the porter. ‘You went to the
Gare du Nord on Sunday, the 28th March, with some passengers for the
8.20 English boat train?’

‘Yes, monsieur.’

‘How many passengers had you?’

The porter considered.

‘Three, monsieur,’ he replied at length.

‘Did you know who they were?’

‘Two of them I knew, monsieur. One was M. Leblanc, a gentleman who
had stayed in the hotel for over a month. The second was M. Felix,
who has been a constant visitor for years. The third was an English
gentleman, but I do not know his name.’

‘Did these gentlemen converse together while in the bus?’

‘I saw M. Felix speaking to the Englishman as they were leaving the
bus, otherwise I cannot say.’

‘Did they go by the 8.20?’

‘Yes, monsieur. I put their luggage into the carriages, and I saw all
three in the train as it was starting.’

‘Was M. Felix alone?’

‘He was, monsieur.’

‘Did he meet or speak with a lady at the station?’

‘I do not think so, monsieur. Certainly I did not see a lady.’

‘Did he seem anxious or perturbed?’

‘Not at all, monsieur. He was just as usual.’

‘Thank you, I am exceedingly obliged.’

Some silver changed hands, and Karl withdrew.

‘That is very satisfactory information, M. le Directeur. The only
other point I want is the names and addresses of the two other
occupants of the bus.’

These were ascertained with some slight difficulty--M. Guillaume
Leblanc, rue Verte, Marseilles, and Mr. Henry Gordon, 327 Angus Lane,
Sauchiehall Street, Glasgow--and the detectives bowed themselves out
with compliments and thanks.

‘That’s a piece of luck,’ remarked Lefarge, as they drove towards the
Gare du Nord. ‘Those men may have seen Felix at other stages of the
journey, and we may be able to trace him the whole way.’

They spent the morning in the great station, interviewing ticket
examiners and other officials, but without success. No one had seen
either of the travellers.

‘The boat is more likely,’ observed Burnley. ‘If he is a constant
traveller, some of the stewards will certainly know him.’

Taking the 4.00 p.m. train, they reached Bolougne as dusk was
falling, and began their inquiries at the pier. Finding the _Pas de
Calais_, which had made the run in which they were interested, would
not leave till noon next day, they turned their steps to the local
police station. There they saw the men who had been on duty when the
boat left on the Sunday in question, but here again without getting
any information. Then they went on board the steamer and sought the
chief steward.

‘I know that gentleman, yes,’ he said when, after introducing
themselves, Lefarge showed him Felix’s photograph. ‘He crosses
frequently, once or twice a month, I should say. He is a M. Felix,
but I cannot say where he lives, nor do I know anything else about
him.’

‘What we want to find out, monsieur, is when he last crossed. If you
can tell us that, we shall be extremely obliged.’

The official considered.

‘I am afraid I could hardly be sure of that. He crossed both ways
fairly lately. I should say about ten days or a fortnight ago, but
I’m not sure of the exact date.’

‘We think he crossed on Sunday, the 28th March. Can you think of
anything that would confirm whether it was this date?’

‘No, I cannot. You see there would be nothing to record it. We could
not now trace the ticket he held, and there is no way in which the
identity of our passengers is ascertained and noted. Speaking from
memory, I should say that the date you mention is about correct, but
I could not be sure.’

‘Is there any one on board who might be able to help us?’

‘I’m really very sorry, monsieur, but I don’t think there is. The
captain, or one of the officers, might know him; I could not say.’

‘Well, just one other question, monsieur. Was he travelling alone?’

‘I think so. No, wait a minute, was he? I believe, now that you
mention it, there was a lady with him. You will understand I was not
noticing particularly, as my mind was occupied with my work, but it’s
like a dream to me, I saw him talking to a lady on the promenade
deck.’

‘You could not describe her?’

‘I could not, monsieur. I cannot be even positive she was there at
all.’

Seeing there was nothing further to be learnt, they thanked the chief
steward courteously. Then, remaining on board, they interviewed every
one they could find, whom they thought might be able to give them
information. Of all they spoke to, only one, a waiter, knew Felix,
and he had not seen him on the occasion in question.

‘That’s no good, I’m afraid,’ said Burnley, as they walked to an
hotel. ‘I believe that steward did see a woman, but he would be
useless as a witness.’

‘Quite. I don’t fancy you’ll get much at Folkestone either.’

‘Most unlikely, I should say, but I can but try. I think I’ll
probably run up to Glasgow and see that man that travelled in the bus
with him. He might know something.

‘If not, I’ll see the other--the one who lives in Marseilles.’

A few minutes before twelve next day saw the detectives strolling
along the wharf beside the English boat.

‘Well,’ said Lefarge, ‘our ways part here. There is no use in my
going to Folkestone, and I’ll take the 2.12 back to Paris. We have
had a pleasant inquiry, and I’m only sorry we have not had a more
definite result.’

‘We’re not done with it yet,’ returned the Englishman. ‘I expect
we’ll get it pretty square before we stop. But I’m really sorry to
say ‘Good-bye,’ and I hope we may be working together again before
long.’

They parted with mutual assurances of goodwill, Burnley expressing
his appreciation of the kindly treatment he had received in Paris,
and Lefarge inviting him back to spend his next holidays in the gay
capital.

We may accompany Lefarge on his return journey to Paris, and follow
him as he endeavours to trace the movements of M. Boirac from the
Saturday night of the dinner-party to the following Thursday evening,
when the cask containing the body was despatched to London from the
State Railway goods station in the rue Cardinet.

He reached the Gare du Nord at 5.45 p.m., and immediately drove to
the Sûreté. M. Chauvet was in his office, and Lefarge reported his
movements since they parted.

‘I had a telephone call from Scotland Yard yesterday,’ said the
Chief. ‘It seems Boirac turned up at eleven as arranged. He
definitely identified the body as that of his wife, so that point is
settled.’

‘Has he returned yet, do you know, monsieur?’

‘I have not heard. Why do you ask?’

‘I thought if he was still away I might take the opportunity of
pumping François about his movements since the murder.’

‘A good idea. We can find out at once.’

M. Chauvet turned over the pages of his telephone directory and,
having found what he wanted, gave a call.

‘Hallo? Is that M. Boirac’s?--Is M. Boirac at home?--About seven
o’clock? Ah, thank you. I’ll ring up again later.--No, don’t mind.
It’s of no consequence.’

He replaced the receiver.

‘He’s crossing by the 11.00 from Charing Cross, and will be home
about seven. If you were to call about half-past six, which is the
hour at which he usually returns, your visit would not be suspicious,
and you could have a chat with François.’

‘I shall do that, monsieur,’ and with a bow the detective withdrew.

The clocks had just finished chiming the half-hour after six when
Lefarge presented himself at the house in the Avenue de l’Alma.
François opened the door.

‘Good-evening, M. François. Is M. Boirac at home?’

‘Not yet, monsieur. We expect him in about half an hour. Will you
come in and wait?’

Lefarge seemed to consider, and then,--

‘Thanks. I think I will.’

The butler preceded him to the small sitting-room into which he had
shown the two detectives on their first call.

‘I heard at the Sûreté that M. Boirac had gone to London to identify
the body. You don’t know, I suppose, if he was able to do so?’

‘No, monsieur. I knew he had gone to London, but I did not know for
what purpose.’

The detective settled himself in a comfortable chair and took out a
cigarette case.

‘Try one of these. They’re special Brazilian cigarettes. I suppose we
may smoke here?’

‘Certainly, monsieur. I thank you.’

‘It’s a long way over from London. I don’t envy Monsieur his journey.
You’ve been, I suppose, monsieur?’

‘Twice, monsieur.’

‘Once is all right to see the place, but after that--no, thank you.
But I suppose M. Boirac is used to it? They say you can get used to
anything.’

‘I should think he must be. He travels a lot. London, Brussels,
Berlin, Vienna--he had been at them all to my knowledge in the last
two years.’

‘I’m glad it’s he and not I. But I should think this unhappy event
would take away his love for travelling. I should imagine he would
want to stay quiet in his own home and see no one. What do you think,
M. François?’

‘Well, he hasn’t anyway, or else he can’t help himself. This is the
second journey he’s made since then.’

‘You surprise me. Or rather, no, you don’t. I suppose we shouldn’t be
talking about what doesn’t concern us, but I would be willing to lay
a napoleon I could tell you where the first journey was to and what
it was for. It was to see the Wilson Test. Am I not right?’

‘The Wilson Test, monsieur? What is that?’

‘Have you never heard of the Wilson Test? Wilson is the head of a
great firm of English pump manufacturers, and each year a reward of
over 10,000 francs is offered by them for any pump that can throw
more water than theirs. A test is held every year, and the last one
took place on Wednesday. M. Boirac would naturally be interested,
being head of a pump manufactory himself. He would go to the Test.’

‘I’m afraid you would have lost your money, then, monsieur. He was
away on Wednesday right enough, but I happen to know he went to
Belgium.’

‘Well,’ said Lefarge, with a laugh, ‘I’m glad we didn’t bet, anyway.
But,’ he added, in a changed tone, ‘maybe I’m right after all. Maybe
he went from Belgium to London, or vice versa. Was he long away?’

‘He could not have done that, monsieur. He was only away two days,
Wednesday and Thursday.’

‘It ought to be a lesson to me. I’m always too ready to bet on an
unsupported opinion,’ and Lefarge led the conversation on to bets he
had won and lost, till François excused himself to prepare for his
master’s arrival.

Shortly after seven M. Boirac came in. He saw Lefarge at once.

‘I don’t wish to trouble you after your journey, monsieur,’ said the
latter, ‘but some further points have arisen in this unhappy
business, and I would be obliged if you could kindly give me an
appointment at whatever time would suit you.’

‘No time like the present. If you will excuse me for an hour till I
change and get some dinner, I shall be at your service. You have
dined, I suppose?’

‘Yes, thank you. If, then, I may wait here for you, I would be glad
to do so.’

‘Then come into the study. You’ll perhaps find something to read in
these book-cases.’

‘I thank you, monsieur.’

The hands of the clock on the study chimney-piece were pointing to
half-past eight when M. Boirac re-entered. Sinking into an
easy-chair, he said:--

‘Now, monsieur, I am at your service.’

‘The matter is a somewhat difficult one for me to approach,
monsieur,’ began Lefarge, ‘in case it might seem to you that we had
suspicions which we do not really entertain. But, as a man of the
world, you will recognise that the position of the husband in unhappy
affairs such as this must inevitably be made clear. It is a matter of
necessary routine. My chief, M. Chauvet, has therefore placed on me
the purely formal, but extremely unpleasant duty of asking you some
questions about your own movements since the unhappy event.’

‘That’s rather roundabout. Do you mean that you suspect me of
murdering my wife?’

‘Certainly not, monsieur. It is simply that the movements of _every
one_ in a case like this must be gone into. It is our ordinary
routine, and we cannot consult our inclination in carrying it out.’

‘Oh, well, go ahead. You must, of course, do your duty.’

‘The information my Chief requires is a statement from you of how you
passed your time from the night of the dinner-party until the evening
of the following Thursday.’

M. Boirac looked distressed. He paused before replying, and then said
in an altered tone:--

‘I don’t like to think of that time. I passed through a rather
terrible experience. I think I was temporarily insane.’

‘I still more regret that I must persevere in my question.’

‘Oh, I will tell you. The seizure, or whatever it was, is over and I
am myself again. What happened to me was this.

‘From the Saturday night, or rather Sunday morning, when I learnt
that my wife had left me, I was in a kind of dream. My brain felt
numb, and I had the curious feeling of existing in some way outside
of and apart from myself. I went as usual to my office on Monday,
returning home at my ordinary time in the evening. After dinner, in
the hope of rousing myself, I unpacked the cask, but even that failed
to excite my interest or lighten my depression. On the following
morning, Tuesday, I again went to the office at my customary time,
but after an hour of effort I found I could no longer concentrate my
mind on my work. I felt that at all costs I must be alone so as to
relax the strain of pretending nothing had happened. Still like a man
in a dream, I left the office and, going down into the street,
entered a Metro station. On the wall my eye caught sight of the
notice, “Direction Vincennes,” and it occurred to me that the Bois de
Vincennes would be the very place for me to go. There I could walk
without fear of meeting any of my acquaintances. I accordingly took
the train there, and spent the morning pacing the more sequestered
paths. The physical exercise helped me, but as I grew tired my mood
changed. A great longing for human sympathy took possession of me,
and I felt I must confide in some one, or go mad. I thought of my
brother Armande, and felt sure I would get the sympathy I wanted from
him. He lived not far from Malines, in Belgium, and I determined to
go and see him at once. I lunched at a little café at Charenton, and
from there telephoned to the office and to my house that I was going
to Belgium for a couple of days. I instructed François to pack a
handbag of necessaries and leave it immediately at the cloak-room at
the Gare du Nord, where I should call for it. While sitting at lunch
it occurred to me that if I went by the 4.05 p.m. train--the first I
could get--I would not arrive at my destination till the middle of
the night, so I decided I would wait till the evening train and see
my brother the following day. Accordingly, I went for a long walk up
the Seine, returning by a local train to the Gare du Lyon. I dined at
a café in the Place de la Bastille, and finally went to the Gare du
Nord, got my bag, and left by the 11.20 for Brussels. I slept well in
the train and breakfasted in one of the cafés off the Place du Nord.
About eleven I left for Malines, walking the four miles to my
brother’s house for the sake of the exercise. But when I reached it I
found it empty, and then I recollected, what had entirely slipped my
memory, that my brother had spoken of a business trip to Stockholm,
on which he was going to take his wife. I cursed my forgetfulness,
but my mind was in such a state I hardly realised my loss of time and
money. Walking slowly back to Malines, I considered returning to
Paris that evening. Then I thought I had had enough travelling for
one day. It was pleasant in the afternoon sun, and I let the time
slip away, returning to Brussels about six. I dined at a café in the
Boulevard Anspach, and then, thinking I would try and distract my
thoughts, decided I would turn in for a couple of hours to a theatre.
I telephoned to the Hôtel Maximilian, where I usually stayed, to
reserve a room, and then I went to Berlioz’s _Les Troyens_ at the
Théâtre de la Monnaie, getting to my hotel about eleven. That night I
slept well and next day my brain seemed saner and better. I left
Brussels by the 12.50 from the Gare du Midi, arriving at Paris about
five. Looking back on that abortive journey is like remembering a
nightmare, but I think the solitude and the exercise really helped
me.’

When M. Boirac ceased speaking, there was silence for a few moments,
while Lefarge, in just the same painstaking way that Burnley would
have adopted, went over in his mind what he had heard. He did not
wish to question M. Boirac too closely lest, in the unlikely event of
that gentleman proving guilty, he should put him on his guard; but he
was anxious to miss no detail of the statement, so that he might as
far as possible check it by independent testimony. On the whole, he
thought the story reasonable, and, so far, he could see no internal
reason for doubting it. He would, therefore, get a few details made
clearer and take his leave.

‘Thank you, M. Boirac. Might I ask a few supplementary questions? At
what time did you leave your office on Tuesday?’

‘About nine-thirty.’

‘What café did you lunch at in Charenton?’

‘I don’t remember. It was in a street about half-way between the
station and the steamboat wharf, a rather poor place with an
overhanging, half-timbered front.’

‘And what time was that?’

‘About one-thirty, I think. I am not sure.’

‘And from where did you telephone to your house and office?’

‘From the same café.’

‘About what time?’

‘About an hour later, say half-past two.’

‘Now, the café in the Place de la Bastille. Which one was it?’

‘I am not very certain. I think it was at the corner of the rue St.
Antoine. At all events it faced up the rue de Lyon.’

‘And you were there about what time?’

‘Eight-thirty, I should say.’

‘Did you get your bag at the Gare du Nord?’

‘Yes, it was waiting for me at the left luggage office.’

‘Did you have a sleeping berth on the train?’

‘No, I travelled in an ordinary first-class compartment.’

‘Was there any one else in it?’

‘Three other men. I did not know any of them.’

‘Now, all that day, Tuesday, did you meet any one who knew you, or
who could confirm your statement?’

‘Not that I can remember, unless the waiters at the cafés could do
so.’

‘On the next day, Wednesday, from where did you telephone to the
Hôtel Maximilian?’

‘From the café where I dined. It was in the Boulevard Anspach, just
before it opens into the Place Brouckère. I don’t recall the name.’

‘What time was the message sent?’

‘Just before dinner, about seven, I should say.’

The detective stood up and bowed.

‘Well, M. Boirac, accept my thanks for your courtesy. That is all I
want to know. Good-night, monsieur.’

The night being fine, Lefarge walked slowly to his home near the
Place de la Bastille. As he paced along he thought over the statement
he had just listened to. If it was true, it appeared at first sight
entirely to clear M. Boirac from suspicion. If he was in Paris on
Monday he could not have sent the letter to Dupierre ordering the
statue. That was received on Tuesday morning, and must therefore have
been posted in London the previous day. If he was at Brussels and
Malines, he obviously could not have met the cask in London. The
first thing would therefore be to test the statement by independent
inquiries. He reviewed it again in detail, taking a mental note of
all the points on which confirmation should be obtainable.

First of all, it should be easy to find out whether he really was in
Paris up till Tuesday evening. François and the other servants could
tell him this with regard to Sunday, Sunday night, and Monday night,
and the office staff at the pump manufactory could testify to Monday
and Tuesday morning. The servants could also tell whether he unpacked
the statue on Monday evening. There was then the question of the time
he left his office on Tuesday; that could easily be ascertained. With
regard to the restaurant at Charenton, M. Boirac would be a
well-dressed and striking luncher at a place in such a locality, and
would therefore undoubtedly have been specially noticed. If he really
did lunch there, confirmation should be easily obtainable,
particularly as the episode of the telephone would further call
attention to the visit. The receipt of these telephone messages
should also be easy to substantiate, as well as the leaving of the
luggage at the Gare du Nord. Confirmation from the Gare du Nord
cloak-room attendant, as well as from the waiters in the restaurant
in the Place de la Bastille, could hardly be expected, owing to the
larger number of strangers these men served, but both places would be
worth trying. Inquiries at Malines might prove Boirac’s visit, and
certainly would show whether he had a brother there, as well as
whether the house was locked up on the day in question. The staff in
the Hôtel Maximilian in Brussels would know whether or not he was
there on the Wednesday night, and could tell about the receipt of the
telephone message booking the room. Finally, it would be worth
finding out if Berlioz’s _Les Troyens_ was really given on that
evening at the Théâtre de la Monnaie.

As Lefarge thought over the matter, he saw that the statement was one
which admitted of a good many tests, and he felt that, if it stood
those he had enumerated, it might be fully accepted.




CHAPTER XIX

THE TESTING OF AN ALIBI

The Seine was looking its best on the following morning, as Lefarge
boarded an east-bound steamer at the Pont des Artes, behind the
Louvre. The day was charming, the air having some of the warmth and
colouring of summer, without having lost the clear freshness of
spring. As the boat swung out into the current, the detective
recalled the last occasion on which he had embarked at this same
pier--that on which he and Burnley had gone downstream to Grenelle to
call on M. Thévenet at the statuary works. This time the same quest
took him in the opposite direction, and they passed round the Ile de
la Cité, along the quais, whose walls are topped by the stalls of the
book-vendors of the Latin Quarter, past the stately twin towers of
Notre Dame, and under the bridge of the Metropolitaine opposite the
Gare d’Austerlitz. As they steamed up the broad river the buildings
became less and less imposing, till before they had covered the four
miles to the suburb of Charenton, where the Marne pours its waters
into the Seine, trees and patches of green had begun to appear.

Landing at Charenton, which was as far as the steamer went, Lefarge
strolled up the street in the direction of the station, looking for a
restaurant with an overhanging, half-timbered front. He had not to
make a long search. The largest and most pretentious café in the
street answered the description and, when he saw telephone wires
leading to it, he felt it was indeed the one he sought. Entering, he
sat down at one of the small marble-topped tables and called for a
bock.

The room was fair sized, with a bar at one corner, and a small
dancing stage facing the door. But for the detective, it was
untenanted. An elderly, white-moustached waiter passed back and
forward from some room in the rear.

‘Pleasant day,’ said Lefarge, when this man came over with his bock.
‘I suppose you don’t get busy till later on?’

The man admitted it.

‘Well, I hear you give a very good lunch, anyway,’ continued the
detective. ‘A friend of mine lunched here some days ago and was much
pleased. And he’s not so easy to satisfy either.’

The waiter smiled and bowed.

‘We try to do our best, monsieur. It is very gratifying to learn that
your friend was satisfied.’

‘Did he not tell you so? He generally says what he thinks.’

‘I am not sure that I know your friend, monsieur. When was he here?’

‘Oh, you’d remember him right enough if you saw him. There he is.’
Lefarge took a photograph of Boirac from his pocket and handed it
over.

‘But yes, monsieur. Quite well I remember your friend. But,’ he
hesitated slightly, ‘he did not strike me as being so much pleased
with the lunch as you suggest. I thought indeed he considered the
restaurant not quite----’ He shrugged his shoulders.

‘He was not very well, but he was pleased right enough. It was last
Thursday he was here, wasn’t it?’

‘Last Thursday, monsieur? No, I think it was earlier. Let me see, I
think it was Monday.’

‘I made a mistake. It was not Thursday. I remember now it was Tuesday
he said. Was it not Tuesday?’

‘Perhaps it was, monsieur, I am not certain; though I rather think it
was Monday.’

‘He telephoned to me that day from Charenton--I think he said from
here. Did he telephone from here?’

‘Yes, monsieur, he made two calls. See, there is the telephone. We
allow all our patrons to use it.’

‘An excellent idea. I am sure it is much appreciated. But there was
an unfortunate mistake about the message he sent me. It was making an
appointment, and he did not turn up. I am afraid I misunderstood what
he said. Could you hear the message? Perhaps, if so, you would tell
me if he spoke of an appointment on last Tuesday?’

The waiter, who up to then had been all smiles and amiability,
flashed a suspicious little glance at the detective. He continued to
smile politely, but Lefarge felt he had closed up like an oyster in
his shell, and when he replied: ‘I could not hear, monsieur. I was
engaged with the service,’ the other suspected he was lying.

He determined to try a bluff. Changing his manner and speaking
authoritatively, though in a lower tone, he said:--

‘Now, look here, _garçon_. I am a detective officer. I want to find
out about those telephone messages, and I don’t want to have the
trouble of taking you to the Sûreté to interrogate you.’ He took out
a five-franc piece. ‘If you can tell me what he said, this will be
yours.’

A look of alarm came into the man’s eyes.

‘But, monsieur----’ he began.

‘Come now, I am certain you know, and you’ve got to tell. You may as
well do it now and get your five francs, as later on at the Sûreté
and for nothing. What do you say now? Which is it to be?’

The waiter remained silent, and it was obvious to Lefarge that he was
weighing his course of action. His hesitation convinced the detective
that he really did know the messages, and he determined to strike
again.

‘Perhaps you are doubtful whether I really am from the Sûreté,’ he
suggested. ‘Look at that.’

He displayed his detective’s credentials, and the sight seemed to
bring the other to a decision.

‘I will tell you, monsieur. He first called up some one that I took
to be his valet, and said he was going unexpectedly to Belgium, and
that he wanted something left at the Gare du Nord for him--I did not
catch what it was. Then he called up some other place and gave the
same message, simply that he was going to Belgium for a couple of
days. That was all, monsieur.’

‘That’s all right, _garçon_. Here’s your five francs.’

‘A good beginning,’ thought the detective, as he left the café and,
turning his back on the river, passed on up the street. There could
be no doubt that Boirac really had lunched at Charenton as he said.
It was true the waiter thought he had been there on Monday, whereas
Boirac had said Tuesday, but the waiter was not certain, and, in any
case, the mistake would be a very easy one to make. Besides, the
point could be checked. He could find out from M. Boirac’s chief
clerk and butler on what day they received their messages.

He walked to Charenton Station, and took a train to the Gare du Lyon.
Hailing a taxi, he was driven to the end of the rue Championnet, the
street in which was situated the pump factory of which M. Boirac was
managing director. As he left the motor and began strolling down the
footpath, he heard the clocks chiming the half-hour after eleven.

The pump factory had not a very long frontage on the street, but,
glancing in through an open gateway, Lefarge saw that it stretched a
long way back. At one side of the gate was a four-story block of
buildings, the door of which bore the legend, ‘Bureau au Deuxième
Étage.’ The detective strolled past with his head averted, looking
round only to make sure there was no other entrance to the works.

Some fifty yards or more beyond the factory, on the opposite side of
the street, there stood a café. Entering in a leisurely way, Lefarge
seated himself at a small marble-topped table in the window, from
where he had a good view of the office door and yard gate of the
works. Ordering another bock, he drew a newspaper from his pocket
and, leaning back in his chair, began to read. He held it carefully
at such a level that he could keep an eye over it on the works
entrance, while at any moment raising it by a slight and natural
movement would screen him from observation from without. So, for a
considerable time he sipped his bock and waited.

Several persons entered and left the works, but it was not till the
detective had sat there nearly an hour and had consumed two more
bocks, that he saw what he had hoped for. M. Boirac stepped out of
the office door and, turning in the opposite direction, walked down
the street towards the city. Lefarge waited for five minutes longer,
then, slowly folding up his paper and lighting a cigarette, he left
the café.

He strolled a hundred yards farther from the works, then crossed and
turning, retraced his steps and passed in through the door from which
the managing director had emerged. Handing in his private card, he
asked for M. Boirac.

‘I’m sorry, monsieur,’ replied the clerk who had come forward, ‘but
he has just gone out. I wonder you didn’t meet him.’

‘No,’ said Lefarge, ‘I must have missed him. But if his confidential
clerk is in, perhaps he could see me instead? Is he here at present?’

‘I believe so, monsieur. If you will take a seat, I’ll inquire.’

In a few moments the clerk returned to say that M. Dufresne was in,
and he was shown into the presence of a small, elderly man, who was
evidently just about to leave for lunch.

‘I rather wanted to see M. Boirac himself, monsieur,’ said Lefarge,
when the customary greetings had passed. ‘It is on a private matter,
but I think I need hardly wait for M. Boirac, as you can probably
tell me what I want to know, if you will be so kind. I am, monsieur,
a detective officer from the Sûreté’--here he produced his official
card--‘and my visit is in connection with some business about which
we are in communication with M. Boirac. You will readily understand I
am not at liberty to discuss its details, but in connection with it
he called recently at the Sûreté and made a statement. There were,
unfortunately, two points which he omitted to tell us and which we,
not then understanding they were relevant, omitted to ask. The matter
is in connection with his recent visit to Belgium, and the two points
I wanted to ask him are, first, the hour he left the office here on
that Tuesday, and second, the hour at which he telephoned to you from
Charenton that he was making the journey. Perhaps you can tell me, or
would you prefer I should wait and see M. Boirac himself?’

The chief clerk did not immediately reply, and Lefarge could see he
was uncertain what line he should take. The detective therefore
continued:--

‘Pray do not answer me if you feel the slightest hesitation. I can
easily wait, if you would rather.’

This had the desired effect and the clerk answered:--

‘Certainly not, monsieur, if you do not wish to do so yourself. I can
answer your questions, or at least one of them. The other I am not so
sure of. I received the telephone message from M. Boirac from
Charenton at about quarter before three. That I am sure of as I
particularly noted the time. As to when M. Boirac left here that
morning, I cannot be so definite. He asked me at nine o’clock to
draft a rather difficult reply to a letter and to take it in to him
when ready. It took me half an hour to compose, as several figures
had to be got out to make the matter clear. I took it in at 9.30 and
he had then gone.’

‘That was on the Tuesday, wasn’t it?’

‘Yes, on the Tuesday.’

‘And it was on the Friday morning M. Boirac returned?’

‘That is so, monsieur.’

Lefarge rose.

‘A thousand thanks, monsieur. I am very grateful to you for saving me
a long wait.’

He left the office and, walking to the Simplon station of the
Metropolitaine, took the train for the centre of the town. He was
pleased with his progress. As in the earlier stages of the inquiry,
information was coming in rapidly. At first he was inclined to think
he had already got enough to confirm the first portion of Boirac’s
statement, then his training re-asserted itself, and he decided to go
back to the house in the Avenue de l’Alma, and if possible get
François’ corroboration. He therefore alighted at Châtelet and took
the Maillot train to Alma, walking down the Avenue.

‘Ah, M. François,’ he began, when the butler opened the door. ‘Here I
am back to trouble you again. Can you spare me a couple of minutes?’

‘Certainly, monsieur. Come in.’

They went to the same small sitting-room and Lefarge produced his
Brazilian cigarettes.

‘How do you like them?’ he asked, as the butler helped himself. ‘Some
people think they’re too strong, but they suit me down to the ground.
Like strong whiffs, only without the cigar flavour. I won’t keep you
a moment. It’s just about that bag of M. Boirac’s you took to the
Gare du Nord last Tuesday. Tell me, were you followed to the station?’

‘Followed, monsieur? I? Why no, certainly not. At least not that I
know of.’

‘Well, did you observe at the left luggage office a rather tall man,
dressed in gray and with a red beard?’

‘No,’ he answered, ‘I saw no one answering to the description.’

‘At what hour did you leave the bag in?’

‘About 3.30, monsieur.’

Lefarge affected to consider.

‘Perhaps it’s my mistake,’ he said at last. ‘It was on Tuesday,
wasn’t it?’

‘On Tuesday. Yes, monsieur.’

‘And M. Boirac sent his telephone call about two, did he not? I think
he said about two.’

‘It was later, monsieur. It was nearer three. But, monsieur, you fill
me with curiosity. How, if I may ask, did you know I took Monsieur’s
bag to the station?’

‘He told me last night. He happened to mention he had unexpectedly
gone to Belgium, and that you had taken his bag to the left luggage
office.’

‘And the man with the red beard?’

Lefarge, having got his information, was not much troubled to justify
his little ruse.

‘One of our detectives. He has been on a case of theft of valuable
luggage. I wondered if you had seen him. By the way, did M. Boirac
bring back the bag with him? _It_ wasn’t stolen?’

Lefarge smiled, and the butler, politely presuming this was meant for
a joke, smiled also.

‘It was not stolen, monsieur. He brought it back all right.’

So far so good. M. Boirac had then, beyond any doubt or question,
telephoned about 2.45 on Tuesday and had instructed the butler to
take his bag to the Gare du Nord, as he had said. Further, he had
called there himself and got the bag. So much was certain. But the
statement he made of his movements on Sunday and Monday, and the
unpacking of the cask on Monday night still remained to be tested.
Lefarge spoke again:--

‘While I’m here, M. François, I wonder would you mind checking one or
two dates for my report?’ He pulled out his notebook. ‘I will read
out and perhaps you would please say if the items are correct.
Saturday, 27th March, the day of the dinner-party.’

‘Correct, monsieur.’

‘Sunday, 28th, nothing special occurred. M. Boirac unpacked the cask
in the evening.’

‘That’s not right, monsieur. It was on Monday the cask was unpacked.’

‘Ah, Monday.’ Lefarge pretended to correct his notes. ‘Monday
evening, of course. M. Boirac was at home on Sunday night, but he did
not unpack it till Monday. That’s right, I think?’

‘That’s right.’

‘Then on Tuesday he went to Belgium, and returned home on Thursday
evening?’

‘Correct, monsieur.’

‘Thanks very much. I’m glad you noticed that slip. I’ve got it right
now, I think.’

He remained conversing for a few minutes, making himself agreeable to
the old man and telling him some of the adventures he had met with
during his career. The more he saw of François, the more he came to
respect him, and he felt increasingly certain the old man’s statement
was to be believed and that he would not lend himself to anything
dishonourable.

As if to balance the successes of the morning, during the whole of
the afternoon Lefarge drew blank. After leaving the house in the
Avenue de l’Alma, he questioned the clerks in the left luggage office
at the Gare du Nord. Here he could get no information at all. No one
remembered François putting in the bag, nor Boirac claiming it, nor
could any record of the bag itself be turned up. Again, in the Place
de la Bastille, where he spent some hours interviewing the waiters in
the various restaurants, both in the Place itself and close by in the
diverging streets, no better luck attended his efforts. He could find
no trace of Boirac’s having dined in any of them.

All the same, he was well satisfied with his day’s work. The
information he had got was definite and valuable, in fact, he thought
it conclusively established the truth of Boirac’s statement, at least
in as far as Tuesday was concerned. If he could do as well in
connection with the Wednesday and Thursday, he thought the
manufacturer’s alibi would stand, and his innocence of the murder
must then be admitted.

To carry on the inquiry, he would have to visit Brussels, and he
accordingly telephoned to the Gare du Nord engaging a berth on the
11.20 p.m. sleeping car train that night. Then, after calling up the
Sûreté, he turned his steps homewards to dine and have a rest till it
was time to start.

He made a comfortable journey, and, having breakfasted in one of the
cafés in the Place du Nord in Brussels, took an early train to
Malines. He presented himself at the post office and asked if he
could be directed to the residence of M. Armande Boirac. The clerk
knew the name, though he was not certain of the address, but after
inquiries at two or three of the principal shops, the detective found
one at which M. Boirac dealt.

‘Yes, monsieur, it’s a good four miles out on the Louvain road. A
large white house with a red roof, standing in trees on the
right-hand side, immediately beyond a cross roads. But I think M.
Boirac is from home, if you wanted to see him.’

‘I did wish to see him,’ returned Lefarge, ‘but I dare say Mme.
Boirac would see me instead.’

‘I fear she is also away, monsieur. At least, I can only tell you
what I know. She came in here about a fortnight ago, indeed, I
remember now it was just this day fortnight, and said: “Oh, Laroche,”
she said, “you need not send anything for two or three weeks, till
you hear from me again. We are going away and are shutting up the
house. So, monsieur, I don’t think you’ll see either of them if you
go out.”

‘I am greatly obliged to you, monsieur. I wonder if you could still
further add to your kindness by informing me of M. Boirac’s place of
business, where I might get his address. He is in business, I
suppose?’

‘He is a banker, monsieur, and goes frequently to Brussels, but I
don’t know in which bank he is interested. But if you go across the
street to M. Leblanc, the avocat, I expect he could tell you.’

Lefarge thanked the polite shopman and, following his advice, called
on the avocat. Here he learned that M. Boirac was one of the
directors of a large private bank, the Crédit Mazières, in the
Boulevard de la Senne, in Brussels.

He was half tempted to return at once to the capital, but a long
experience had convinced him of the folly of accepting _any_
statement without investigation. To be on the safe side, he felt he
should go out and see for himself if the house was indeed empty. He
therefore hired a small car and drove out along the Louvain road.

The day was bright and sunny, though with a little sharpness in the
air, and Lefarge enjoyed the run through the pleasant Belgian
country. He hoped to get his work finished by the afternoon, and, in
that case, he would go back to Paris by the night train.

About fifteen minutes brought them to the house, which Lefarge
immediately recognised from the shopman’s description. A glance
showed it was empty. The gates of the avenue were fastened with a
padlock and chain, and, through the surrounding trees, the window
shutters could be seen to be closed. The detective looked about him.

Alongside the road close to the gates were three cottages, occupied
apparently by peasants or farm labourers. Lefarge stepped up to the
first of these and knocked.

‘Good morning,’ he said, as a buxom, middle-aged woman came to the
door. ‘I have just come from Brussels to see M. Boirac, and I find
the house is locked up. Can you tell me if there is a caretaker, or
any one who could tell me where M. Boirac is to be found?’

‘I am the caretaker, monsieur, but I do not know M. Boirac’s address.
All he told me before he left was that any letters sent to the Crédit
Mazières in Brussels would be forwarded.’

‘He has not then been gone long, I suppose?’

‘A fortnight to-day, monsieur. He said he would be away three weeks,
so if you could call in about a week, you should see him.’

‘By the way, a friend of mine was to call on him here last week. I am
afraid he must have missed him also. You did not see my friend?’ He
showed her Boirac’s photograph.

‘No, monsieur, I did not see him.’

Lefarge thanked the woman and, having walked round to two or three of
the other neighbouring houses and asked the same questions without
result, he re-entered the car and was driven back to Malines. From
there he took the first train to Brussels.

It was close on two o’clock when he entered the ornate portal of the
Crédit Mazières, of which M. Boirac was a director. The building was
finished with extraordinary richness, no expense having been spared
in its decoration. The walls of the vast public office were entirely
covered with choice marbles--panels of delicate green separated by
pilasters and cornice of pure white. The roof rose with a lofty dome
of glass which filled the building with a mellow and pleasant light.
‘No want of money here,’ Lefarge thought, as he approached the
counter and, handing in his card, asked to see the manager.

He had to wait for some minutes, then, following a clerk along a
corridor decorated in the same style as the office, he was ushered
into the presence of a tall, elderly gentleman with clean-shaven
features and raven black hair, who was seated at a large roll-top
desk.

Having exchanged greetings, Lefarge began:--

‘I wonder, monsieur, if you would be so very kind as to tell me
whether the M. Armande Boirac, who is a member of your board, is the
brother of M. Raoul Boirac, the managing director of the Avrotte Pump
Construction Company of Paris? I went to Malines this morning to see
M. Armande, but he was from home, and I do not wish to spend time in
finding out his address and communicating with him, unless he really
is the man I seek.’

‘Our director, monsieur,’ replied the manager, ‘is a brother of M.
Raoul. Though I don’t know the latter personally, I have heard our M.
Boirac speak of him. I can also give you M. Armande’s present
address, if you require it.’

‘I am exceedingly obliged, monsieur, and should be most grateful for
the address.’

‘It is Hôtel Rydberg, Stockholm.’

Lefarge noted it in his book and, with further thanks, left the bank.

‘Now for the Théâtre de la Monnaie,’ he thought. ‘It is just around
the corner.’

He crossed the Place de Brouckère, and turned into the Place de la
Monnaie. The box office of the theatre was open, and he interviewed
the clerk, learning that Berlioz’s _Les Troyens_ was given on the
Wednesday night in question, as stated by M. Boirac. But a search for
that gentleman’s name through the list of that evening’s bookings was
unproductive, though, as the clerk pointed out, this did not mean
that he was not present, but only that he had not reserved a seat.

Lefarge’s next visit was to be the Hôtel Maximilian. It was a large
modern building occupying a complete block of the Boulevard Waterloo,
not far from the Porte Louise. A polite clerk came to the bureau
window to attend to him.

‘I am expecting to meet a M. Boirac here,’ Lefarge began. ‘Can you
tell me if he is in the hotel?’

‘M. Boirac?’ repeated the clerk, doubtfully, ‘I do not think we have
any one of that name here at present.’ He turned over a card index on
the desk. ‘No, monsieur, he has not come yet.’

Lefarge took out a photograph.

‘That is he,’ he said, ‘a M. Raoul Boirac, of Paris.’

‘Oh, to be sure,’ returned the clerk, ‘I know that gentleman. He has
frequently stayed with us, but he is not here at present.’

The detective began to turn over the leaves of his pocket-book as if
looking for something.

‘I hope I haven’t made a mistake in the date,’ he said. ‘He wasn’t
here recently by any chance, was he?’

‘He was here, monsieur, quite lately--last week in fact. He spent one
night.’

Lefarge made a gesture of annoyance.

‘I’ve missed him!’ he exclaimed. ‘As sure as fate I’ve missed him.
Can you tell me what night he was here?’

‘Certainly, monsieur.’ He turned up some papers. ‘He was here on
Wednesday night, the 31st March.’

‘I’ve missed him. Now, isn’t that too bad? I must have mistaken the
date.’ The detective stood apparently considering.

‘Did he mention my name--Pascal, Jules Pascal?’

The clerk shook his head.

‘Not to me, monsieur.’

Lefarge continued, as if to himself:--

‘He must have come through from Paris that night.’ And then to the
clerk: ‘You don’t remember, I suppose, what time he arrived?’

‘Yes, I do. It was late in the evening, about eleven, I should think.’

‘Rather a chance coming at that hour, wasn’t it? He might easily have
found you full?’

‘Oh, he had reserved his room. Earlier in the evening he telephoned
up from a restaurant in the Boulevard Anspach that he was coming.’

‘Was that before five? I was to meet him about five.’

‘Not so early, I think. More like half-past seven or even eight, as
well as I can remember.’

‘Well, I can’t understand it at all. But I mustn’t be wasting your
time. I’ll write a note and, if he should turn up again, perhaps you
would be kind enough to give it to him? I’m much obliged to you, I’m
sure.’

Lefarge was an artist in his profession. He never made an
impersonation without carrying through the details in the most
thorough manner possible. He therefore wrote a note to M. Boirac in
an assumed hand, regretting having missed him and carefully
explaining some quite imaginary business. Having signed it ‘Jules
Pascal’ with a flourish, and left it with the clerk, he took his
leave.

As he passed out of the Boulevard Waterloo to return to the old town,
the clocks were striking six. He had completed his errand and he was
tired, though well satisfied with its result. He would rest in a
picture house for an hour or two, then have a leisurely dinner and
catch the midnight train for Paris.

Sitting over his coffee in a quiet corner of one of the large
restaurants in the Boulevard du Nord, he reviewed once more M.
Boirac’s statement, ticking off in his mind the various items he had
been able to check. On Saturday night Madame had disappeared. On
Sunday and Sunday night Boirac was at his home. Monday he spent at
his office, and that night he was again at home. On that same Monday
evening he had unpacked the statue from the cask. Tuesday morning saw
him in his office at the usual hour, but he had left again between
nine o’clock and half-past. About 1.30 that same day he had lunched
at Charenton, and shortly after 2.30 had telephoned to François and
to his office. François had taken his bag to the Gare du Nord about
3.30, and Boirac had got it from there, as he had brought it back
with him from Belgium. He had telephoned to the Hôtel Maximilian
about 7.30 or 8.00 on the Wednesday, and had slept there that night.
Next day he had returned to Paris, reaching his house in the evening.
Further, it was true that his brother lived at Malines and that his
house had been shut up on the Wednesday in question, also that
Berlioz’s _Les Troyens_ was given on the night he said.

So much was absolute bedrock fact, proved beyond any doubt or
question. Lefarge then turned his mind to the portions of Boirac’s
statement which he had not been able to verify.

He could not tell whether the manufacturer had walked in the Bois de
Vincennes before lunching at Charenton, nor if he had gone up the
Seine after it. He could not trace his having dined in any of the
cafés of the Place de la Bastille. He had not proved that he went to
Malines or called at his brother’s house, nor did he know if he had
been present at the opera in Brussels.

As he considered the matter, he came to the conclusion that in the
nature of things he could hardly have expected to confirm these
points, and he also decided they were not essential to the statement.
All the essentials--Boirac’s presence at Charenton and in
Brussels--particularly in Brussels--he had proved up to the hilt. He
therefore came to the deliberate conclusion that the pump
manufacturer’s statement was true. And if it was true M. Boirac was
innocent of the murder, and if he was innocent--Felix . . .

Next day he made his report to M. Chauvet at the Sûreté.




CHAPTER XX

SOME DAMNING EVIDENCE

When Burnley left Lefarge on the pier at Boulogne, he felt as if he
was losing a well-tried friend. Not only had the Frenchman, by his
kindliness and cheerful companionship, made Burnley’s stay in the
French capital a pleasant one, but his skill and judgment had been a
real asset in the inquiry.

And how rapidly the inquiry had progressed! Never before could
Burnley recall having obtained so much information on any case in so
short a time. And though his work was by no means complete, he was
yet within reasonable distance of the end.

After an uneventful crossing he reached Folkestone and immediately
went to the police station. There he saw the men who had been on duty
when the _Pas de Calais_ had berthed on the Sunday in question. But
his inquiries were without result. No one resembling either Felix or
Mme. Boirac had been observed.

He next tried the Customs officials, the porters who had taken the
luggage from the boat, and the staff at the Pier Station. No
information was forthcoming.

‘H’m. Means going to Glasgow, I suppose,’ he thought and, turning
into the telegraph office on the platform he sent a wire:--


‘Henry Gordon, 327 Angus Lane, Sauchiehall Street, Glasgow. Could you
see me if I called at ten to-morrow. Reply Burnley, Scotland Yard.’


Then he set off to walk to the Town Station to catch the next train
for London.

At New Scotland Yard he had an interview with his Chief, to whom he
recounted the results of the consultation in the Sûreté, and his
movements during the past two days, explaining that he proposed to go
on to Glasgow that night if Mr. Gordon could see him the next
morning. Then he went home for an hour’s rest. Ten o’clock saw him
back at the Yard, where a telegram from Mr. Gordon was awaiting him.
‘Can see you to-morrow at the hour named.’

‘So far, so good,’ he thought, as he called a taxi and was driven to
Euston, where he caught the 11.50 express for the north. He usually
slept well in trains, and on this occasion he surpassed himself, only
waking when the attendant came round half an hour before they were
due in Glasgow.

A bath and breakfast at the Central Hotel made him feel fresh and fit
as he sallied forth to keep his appointment in Angus Lane,
Sauchiehall Street. Ten o’clock was chiming from the city towers as
he pushed open the office door of No. 327, which bore the legend,
‘Mr. Henry Gordon, Wholesale Tea Merchant.’ That gentleman was
expecting him, and he was ushered into his private room without delay.

‘Good morning, sir,’ he began, as Mr. Gordon, a tall man with small,
fair side whiskers, and two very keen blue eyes, rose to meet him. ‘I
am an Inspector from Scotland Yard, and I have taken the liberty of
making this appointment to ask your help in an inquiry in which I am
engaged.’

Mr. Gordon bowed.

‘Well, sir, and what do you wish me to do?’

‘To answer a few questions, if you don’t mind.’

‘I shall be pleased if I am able.’

‘Thank you. You were in Paris recently, I believe?’

‘That is so.’

‘And you stayed at the Hotel Continental?’

‘I did.’

‘Can you tell me what day you left to return to England?’

‘Yes, it was Sunday, the 28th of March.’

‘You drove, if I am not mistaken, from the hotel to the Gare du Nord
in the hotel bus?’

‘I did.’

‘Now, Mr. Gordon, can you recollect what, if any, other persons
travelled with you in the bus?’

The tea merchant did not immediately reply.

‘I did not specially observe, Mr. Inspector. I am not sure that I can
tell you.’

‘My information, sir, is that three gentlemen travelled by that bus.
You were one, and the man I am interested in was another. I am told
that he conversed with you, or made at least one remark as you were
leaving the bus at the station. Does this bring the circumstance to
your mind?’

Mr. Gordon made a gesture of assent.

‘You are correct. I recall the matter now, and the men too. One was
small, stout, clean-shaven, and elderly, the other younger, with a
black pointed beard and rather foppishly dressed. They were both
French, I took it, but the black-bearded man spoke English
excellently. He was talkative, but the other hadn’t much to say. Is
it the bearded man you mean?’

For answer Burnley held out one of Felix’s photographs.

‘Is that he?’

‘Yes, that’s the man sure enough. I remember him perfectly now.’

‘Did he travel with you to London?’

‘He didn’t travel with me, but he got to London all right, for I saw
him twice again, once on the boat and once as I was leaving the
station at Charing Cross.’

Here was definite evidence anyway. Burnley congratulated himself and
felt glad he had not delayed making this visit.

‘Did he travel alone?’

‘So far as I know. He certainly started alone from the hotel.’

‘And he didn’t meet any one _en route_ that you saw?’

‘When I saw him on the boat he was talking to a lady, but whether
they were travelling together or merely chance acquaintances I
couldn’t say.’

‘Was this lady with him in London?’

‘Not that I saw. He was talking to a man on the platform as I drove
out. A tall young fellow, dark and rather good-looking.’

‘Would you know this young man again if you saw him?’

‘Yes, I think so. I got a good look at his face.’

‘I should be obliged if you would describe him more fully.’

‘He was about five feet eleven or six feet in height, rather thin and
athletic looking. He had a pale complexion, was clean-shaven except
for a small black moustache, and was rather French looking. He was
dressed in some dark clothes, a brown overcoat, I fancy, but of that
I’m not sure. I imagined he was meeting your friend, but I had really
no definite reason to think so.’

‘Now, the lady, Mr. Gordon. Can you describe her?’

‘No, I’m afraid I can’t. She was sitting beside him and I did not see
her face.’

‘Can you tell how she was dressed?’

‘She wore a reddish brown fur coat, sable, I fancy, though I’m not
certain.’

‘And her hat? You didn’t notice anything special about that.’

‘No, nothing.’

‘It hadn’t, for example, a wide brim?’

‘A wide brim? Not that I noticed. But it may have had.’

‘Was it windy where they were sitting?’

‘Every place was windy that day. It was an abominable crossing.’

‘So that if it had had a wide brim, the lady would have had
difficulty in keeping it on?’

‘Possibly,’ replied Mr. Gordon a trifle dryly, ‘but you probably can
form an opinion on that as well as I.’

Burnley smiled.

‘We Scotland Yard people like to know everything,’ he said. ‘And now,
Mr. Gordon, I have to express my thanks for your courtesy and help.’

‘That’s all right. Would it be indiscreet to ask the reason of these
queries?’

‘Not at all, sir, but I fear I am not at liberty to give you much
information. The man with the pointed beard is suspected of having
decoyed a French lady over to England and murdered her. But, you will
understand, it is so far only a matter of suspicion.’

‘Well, I should be interested to hear how it turns out.’

‘I am afraid you will hear, sir. If this man is tried, I expect your
evidence will be required.’

‘Then for both our sakes I hope your case will not go on. Good-day,
Mr. Burnley. Glad to have met you.’

There being nothing to keep him in Glasgow, the Inspector returned to
the Central and took the midday London express. As it thundered
southwards across the smiling country, he thought over the interview
he had just had. He could not help marvelling again at the luck that
had pursued his efforts ever since the inquiry began. Nearly every
one he had interviewed had known at least something, if not always
exactly what he wanted. He thought how many thousands of persons
crossed the Channel each week whose journey it would be absolutely
impossible to trace, and here, in the one instance that mattered, he
had found a man who had been able to give him the very information he
needed. Had Felix not gone in the bus, had Mr. Gordon not been so
observant, had the circumstances not fallen out precisely as they
did, he might never have ascertained the knowledge of Felix’s
movements that day. And the same applied all through. Truly, if he
did not get a complete case it would be his own fault.

And yet the evidence was unsatisfactory. It was never conclusive. It
had a kind of thus-far-and-no-farther quality which always pointed to
a certain thing, but stopped short of certainty. Here there was a
strong presumption that Mme. Boirac had crossed with Felix, but no
proof. It might, however unlikely, have been some one else. Nearly
all the evidence he had got was circumstantial, and he wanted
certainty.

His mind switched over to the case itself. He felt the probability of
Felix’s guilt had been somewhat strengthened. Mr. Gordon’s statement
was entirely consistent with that hypothesis. One would naturally
expect the journey to be carried out just as it had been. In Paris,
the lovers would be careful not to be seen together. At a station
like the Gare du Nord, where acquaintances of both might easily be
present, they would doubtless ignore each other’s existence. On the
boat they would probably risk a conversation, particularly as the
deck was almost deserted owing to the weather, but in London,
especially if Felix expected some one to meet him, they would follow
their Paris plan and leave the station separately. Yes, it certainly
worked in.

The Inspector lit one of his strong cigars and gazed with unseeing
eyes at the flying landscape as he continued his ruminations. On
arrival in London what would be their next step? Felix, he expected,
would shake off his friend, meet Madame at some prearranged spot, and
in all probability take her to St. Malo. Then he recalled that the
housekeeper had been granted a holiday, and they would doubtless
arrive to find a house without food or fire, empty and cheerless.
Therefore would they not go to an hotel? He thought it likely, and he
began to plan a possible future step, a visit to all the probable
hotels. But while speculating on the best to begin with, it occurred
to him that if Felix had really committed the murder, it must, almost
certainly, have been done at St. Malo. He could not conceive it
possible at a hotel. Therefore probably they did go to the villa
after all.

He went a step further. If the murder had taken place at St. Malo,
the cask must have been packed there. He recalled the traces this
operation had left in Boirac’s study. Surely some similar indications
must have been left at the villa? If the cask had stood on a carpet
or even possibly a linoleum, he might expect marks of the ring. And
if not, there was the sawdust. He did not believe every trace of
sawdust could have been removed.

It had been his intention in any case to search the house, and he
took a mental note when doing so to look with special care for any
such traces. This search, he decided, should be his next business.

On the following morning, therefore, he set out for St. Malo with his
assistant, Sergeant Kelvin. As they drove, he explained the theory
about the unpacking of the cask, and pointed out what, if this had
been done, they might expect to find.

The house was empty as, owing to Felix still being in the hospital,
the housekeeper’s leave had been extended. Burnley opened the door
with a key from Felix’s bunch and the two men entered.

Then took place a search of the most meticulous thoroughness. Burnley
began in the yard and examined each of the out-houses in turn. These
had concrete floors and marks of the cask itself were not to be
expected, but they were carefully brushed and the sweepings examined
with a powerful lens for traces of sawdust. All their contents were
also inspected, Felix’s two-seater, which was standing in the
coach-house, receiving its full share of attention. Then the
searchers moved to the house, one room after another being gone over
in the same painstaking way, but it was not till they were doing
Felix’s dressing-room, that Burnley made his first discovery.

Several of Felix’s suits were hanging in a press, and in the
right-hand side pocket of one of the coats--that of a blue lounge
suit--there was a letter. It was crumpled and twisted, as if thrust
carelessly into the pocket. Burnley did not at first notice anything
interesting or important about it, till, reading it for the second
time, it flashed across his mind that here, perhaps, was the very
thing for which they had been searching--the link in that chain of
evidence against Felix which up to then had been missing.

The letter was written on a sheet of rather poor quality notepaper in
a woman’s hand, rather uneducated both as to caligraphy and
diction--such a letter, thought Burnley, as might be written by a
barmaid or waitress or shopgirl. There was no water or other
distinctive mark on it. It bore no address, and ran as follows:--


                                                          ‘Monday.

‘MY DEAREST LÉON.--It is with a heavy heart I take up my pen to write
these few lines. What has happened to you, dearest? Are you ill? If
you are, I will come out to you, no matter what happens. I can’t go
on without you. I waited in all yesterday hoping you would come, same
as I waited in all the Sunday before, and every night of the week,
but you didn’t come. And the money is nearly done, and Mrs. Hopkins
says if I can’t pay next week I’ll have to go. I’ve sometimes thought
you were tired of me and weren’t going to come back at all, and then
I thought you weren’t that sort, and that you were maybe ill or away.
But do write or come, for I can’t go on any longer without you.

                                             ‘Your heartbroken

                                                          ‘EMMIE.’


When Burnley glanced over this melancholy epistle it seemed at first
merely to indicate that Felix was no better than he might be, and it
was not till he had read it again that its immense significance
struck him. What if this paper supplied the motive of the murder?
What if it had opened to Mme. Boirac a chapter in Felix’s life which
otherwise would have remained closed, and which he intended should
remain closed? As Burnley thought over it he believed he could at
least dimly reconstruct the scene. Felix and Madame had arrived at
St. Malo, and then in some way, by some act of extraordinary
carelessness on Felix’s part, she got hold of the letter. A quarrel
would be inevitable. What would Felix do? Probably first snatch the
letter from her and thrust it into his pocket out of sight. Then,
perhaps, try to pacify the angry lady, and, finding this impossible,
the quarrel would get worse and worse till finally in a paroxysm of
passion he would seize her throat and choke out her life. The murder
committed, he would be so upset that he would quite probably forget
all about the letter. The oversights of criminals were notorious.

The more the Inspector considered the matter, the more likely his
theory seemed. But here again he had to recognise it was entirely
surmise. No proof that this had taken place was forthcoming. It was
another case of the thus-far-and-no-farther evidence he had been
deploring in the train. At all events it suggested another line of
inquiry. This girl must be found and the relations between her and
Felix gone into. Burnley foresaw much arduous work in front of him.

At length he put the letter away in his notebook, and the search
continued. Finally, as it was beginning to get dusk, every room had
been done except the study where Felix and the Inspector had had
their midnight discussion.

‘I think we had better come back to-morrow,’ said Burnley. ‘There’s
no use in searching by lamplight.’

Accordingly, the next morning saw them again at work. They crawled
over the floor so as to get every part of the carpet between
themselves and the light, but could find no impressions. They peered
with their lenses in the pile of the carpet, they felt between the
arms and seats of the padded leathern chairs, all to no purpose. And
then Burnley made his second discovery.

Between the study and the dining-room adjoining there was a door,
evidently unused, as it was locked and the key was gone. On the study
side this door was covered by a heavy curtain of dark-green plush. In
front of the curtain, and standing with its back to it, was a small
chair whose low, leather-padded back formed a half-circle with the
arms. In his anxiety to leave no part of the carpet unexamined,
Burnley had moved this chair aside.

As he stooped at the place where the chair had been, a bright object
sticking to the curtain caught his eye. He looked more closely. A
small, slightly bent, gold safety-pin, bearing a tiny row of
diamonds, was caught in the braid at the top of the hem. The point
had not penetrated, and the pin fell to the floor when Burnley
touched the plush.

He picked it up.

‘That’s rather a fine thing even for a natty boy like Felix,’ he said
as he showed it to Kelvin. And then he stood quite still as it
flashed across his mind that here, perhaps, was another link in the
chain that was being forged about Felix--a link possibly even more
important than any of the foregoing. What if it did not belong to
Felix at all? It looked too dainty and delicate for a man’s use. What
if it was a lady’s? And, most important question of all, what if that
lady was Mme. Boirac? If this proved true, his case was complete.

Dropping into the arm-chair he had occupied on the occasion of his
midnight interview with Felix, he considered the possibilities opened
up by his new discovery, endeavouring to evolve some theory of how a
pin or brooch belonging to the deceased lady could have been dropped
where he found this one. As he did so, a picture of what might have
happened gradually grew in his mind. First, he thought it likely that
a lady in evening dress would wear such a pin, and it might easily be
at her neck or shoulder. And if she had sat in that chair with her
back to the curtain, and any one had caught her by the throat and
forced her head backwards, what could be more likely than that the
pin should be pulled out in the struggle? And if it were pulled out
it almost certainly would drop where or whereabouts he found it.

The Inspector recognised again that this was all surmise, but it was
strengthened by the fact that the pin was undoubtedly bent as if it
had been pulled out of something without being unhooked. The more he
thought over it the more likely his idea seemed. At all events it
would be easy to test it. Two points suggested themselves to his mind
which would settle it conclusively. First, if the pin were Madame’s,
the maid Suzanne would recognise it. The arrangement of the diamonds
made it quite distinctive. The girl would also know if Madame wore it
on the night of the dinner-party. Secondly, if it were pulled out of
Madame’s dress, the latter would probably be torn or at least marked.
Both these points could easily be ascertained, and he decided he
would write to Paris about them that night.

He put the brooch into a pocket case, and, getting up, resumed his
search of the study. For a time he pursued his labours without
result, and then he made another discovery which struck him as being
of even greater importance than that of the pin. He had completed his
examination of the furniture, and now, for over an hour, had been
seated at Felix’s desk going through drawer after drawer, reading old
letters and examining the watermarks of papers and the alignment of
typewritten documents. Felix evidently had some of the defects of the
artistic temperament, for his papers were jumbled together without
any attempt at filing or classification--accounts, receipts,
invitations, engagements, business letters--all were thrust
higgledy-piggledy into the first drawer that came handy. But Burnley
had methodically gone through every one without finding anything of
interest. None of the papers had the watermark of that ordering the
statue from Dupierre, none of the typewriting had the defective
letters of that ostensibly from Le Gautier to Felix. The Inspector
had just reflected that he had only to go through the half-dozen
shelves of books and his work would be done, when he made his third
find.

On the desk lay a number of sheets of blotting paper folded
pamphlet-wise, it being evidently Felix’s custom to blot his wet
papers between two of the leaves. Following his usual routine, the
Inspector fetched a mirror from the bathroom, and with its aid
examined the sheets from each edge in turn. At the fourth of these
sheets he stopped suddenly with a little gesture of triumph, for
there, clearly revealed in the mirror, were some words he had seen
before:--


.s .. .s th. .... s.c. .. ... l... .. t.. ......

.le... fo.wa.. ..med....ly to ..e ..ove .dd.ess.

I do ..t kn.w th. e.a.t pric., but ..der.t..d .t is about 1500
francs. I therefore enclose notes for that


It was the bottom of the first page of the letter ordering the statue
from Dupierre! Here was certainty: here, at last, proofs of the most
complete kind! Felix had ordered the statue and like a fool had
blotted his letter and omitted to destroy the blotsheet!

The Inspector chuckled with content at his find. Felix had ordered
the statue. That was now certain. And if he had done so he was
responsible for its first journey, and therefore undoubtedly for its
second and third. In fact, it was now evident he had arranged all the
movements of the cask, and, if so, he must unquestionably have put in
the body, and if he put in the body he must be the murderer.

Then there was the further point about the paper. The paper on which
this letter had been written was the same as that on which the letter
about the lottery and the bet was typed. Felix had stated he had
received this letter by post, but at the discussion in M. Chauvet’s
office the probability that he himself was the author had been
recognised. This probability was now strengthened by finding he had
had in his possession the peculiar French paper which had been used.

Truly these three discoveries, the letter signed ‘Your heartbroken
Emmie,’ the bent brooch on the curtain, and the tell-tale impression
on the blotting paper seemed to the Inspector entirely to settle the
question of Felix’s guilt.

On the other hand he had failed to find any trace of the unpacking of
the cask, and his search had been so thorough that he almost felt
impelled to the conclusion that it had not been there at all. And
then a possible explanation struck him. Suppose Felix had got a cart
and brought the cask to St. Malo, intending to remove it again the
following morning. Where would he put it for the night? It was too
heavy to move by himself, and he would want to have a helper. What
then would he do? Why, leave it on the cart, of course! His obvious
plan would be to stable the horse and open the cask where it
stood--on the cart. And if he dropped some sawdust in the process,
the wind would see to that. There would be none left now.

He felt sure he was on the right track, and then he had a further
idea. If a horse were stabled at the villa all night, some traces
should surely be visible. He went to the yard again and began a new
quest. But this time he had no luck. He was forced to conclude no
horse had been kept.

The possibility that the carter might have left his vehicle and taken
the horse away with him for the night next occurred to him, but he
thought that unlikely, and left the question undecided in the
meantime.

On his return to Scotland Yard, the Chief heard his story with close
attention, and was much impressed by his discoveries. He gave his
views at some length, ending up:--

‘We shall send the pin over to Paris and see if that girl identifies
it. Indeed, whether or not, I think we have a sufficient case against
Felix to go into court. By the way, I don’t think I told you I sent a
man to his firm, the poster people, and found that he was absent on
holidays during the week the cask was travelling backwards and
forwards to Paris. This, of course, is not evidence against him, but
it works in with our theory.’

Two days later a wire came from M. Chauvet:--


‘Suzanne Daudet identifies pin as Madame’s property.’


‘That settles it,’ said the Chief, and a warrant was made out for
Felix’s arrest, so soon as he should be well enough to leave the
hospital.




PART III--LONDON AND PARIS




CHAPTER XXI

A NEW POINT OF VIEW

Of the millions who unfolded their papers a few mornings after the
events described in the last chapter, there were few but felt a
thrill of excitement as their eyes fell on the headlines, ‘The Cask
Mystery. Arrest of Léon Felix.’ Though by no means all the facts
discovered by the police had become public, enough had leaked out to
arouse a keen and general interest. The tragic circumstances of the
case, no less than the baffling mystery in which it was shrouded,
intrigued the popular imagination and, though the police were early
credited with having the usual clue and the customary arrest was
stated to be imminent, none outside the official ranks had any real
idea in what direction suspicion was tending.

But to none of those millions did the news come with such a sense of
personal shock and affront as to our old acquaintance, Dr. William
Martin, of The Elms, near Brent village, on the Great North Road. Dr.
Martin, it will be remembered, was the man who, on the night on which
Constable Walker watched from behind his tree, called at St. Malo and
insisted on Felix accompanying him home to play bridge. The two men
were close friends. Many an afternoon they had spent together on the
banks of a neighbouring trout stream, many an evening had slipped
rapidly away round the doctor’s billiard table. And with Martin’s
family also Felix was a favourite. No member of it but was pleased to
welcome the Frenchman to the house, or but had some special
confidence to share with him.

At first Dr. Martin could hardly believe his eyes as they rested on
the fatal headlines. That Felix, his friend, his trusted companion,
should be arrested! And for murder! The thought was so incredible, so
utterly horrible, he could not take it in. But, unlike the nightmare
to which he compared it, the idea had permanence. Though his thoughts
might wander, it was always there, grim and terribly definite, for
them to return to.

He began to think over his friend’s circumstances. Felix had always
been reticent about his life, but to the doctor he had seemed a
lonely man. He lived alone, and Martin had never known him to have
visitors staying in the house. Nor could the doctor recall the
Frenchman’s ever having spoken of relatives. ‘Who,’ he wondered,
‘will help him now?’

But with so kindly and warm-hearted a man as Dr. Martin, such a
question could not long remain unanswered. ‘I must go and see him,’
he thought. ‘I must find out who is going to act for him. If he has
no one, then I must do the best I can myself.’

But a practical difficulty arose. How were orders to visit prisoners
obtained? The doctor did not know. For a man of his age and standing
he was singularly ignorant of legal matters. But when such came his
way he invariably adopted the same simple expedient. He ‘saw
Clifford.’ This difficulty he would meet in the same way. He would
‘see Clifford.’

‘Clifford’--otherwise John Wakefield Clifford, senior partner of
Messrs. Clifford and Lewisham, Solicitors, Grey’s Inn--was Martin’s
man of business, friend, and crony. The chance that they took the
same weekly half-holiday had thrown them together on the links, and
they had followed up the acquaintanceship by occasional visits at
each other’s houses. Mr. Clifford was an almost startling contrast to
the breezy doctor. Small, elderly, and rather wizened, with white
hair and moustache, and dressed always with meticulous care, he
seemed the embodiment of conventional propriety. His manner was
precise and dry, but the fortunate gift of a sense of humour saved
him from becoming dull.

He was a fine lawyer. His admirers, who were many, held that an
opinion from him was as good as Counsel’s any day, and knew that,
beneath the keenness which made him so formidable an opponent, there
lay a deep vein of very real human kindness.

A press of unavoidable business kept Martin at work till the
afternoon, but three o’clock saw him ascending the stairs of Messrs
Clifford and Lewisham’s office.

‘How are you, Martin?’ the senior partner greeted him. ‘I am glad to
see you. This is an unexpected pleasure.’

‘Thanks, old chap,’ returned the doctor, accepting the cigarette the
other offered, and sinking back into a deep, leather-lined arm-chair.
‘But I’m afraid there won’t be much pleasure about my visit. It’s
business, and nasty business at that. Have you a few minutes to
spare?’

The little man bowed gravely.

‘Certainly,’ he said, ‘I am at your service.’

‘It’s about that neighbour of mine, Léon Felix,’ went on the doctor,
plunging without further preamble into his subject. ‘You saw he was
arrested last night on a charge of murdering the woman whose body was
found in the cask? You know about it?’

‘I read the account in this morning’s paper. And so Felix was a
neighbour of yours?’

‘Yes, and a close friend. He was in and out of the house like one of
the family.’

‘Indeed? I am sorry to hear that.’

‘Yes. I thought a good deal of him and I’m naturally upset. We all
are, as a matter of fact. I wanted your advice as to what could be
done for him.’

‘You mean with regard to his defence?’

‘Yes.’

‘Have you seen him since his arrest?’

‘No. That’s one of the things I wanted to ask you about. I am not
quite sure how you get an order.’

‘That can be obtained where a sufficient reason for its application
can be shown. I understand, then, that you are unaware of his own
plans for his defence?’

‘Yes. My idea was to see him and talk the thing over, and, unless he
has made some other arrangement, to ask you to undertake it.’

The lawyer nodded slowly. Martin’s suggestion was eminently
satisfactory to him. Apart from the mere money involved, this case,
from its unusual and dramatic nature, promised to be at least one of
the most famous of the year. He decided that if it came his way he
would attend to it personally, and see that no stone was left
unturned to secure an acquittal.

‘If you put the case in our hands,’ he replied at length, ‘quite
apart from our personal friendship, you may depend on our doing our
utmost for your friend. But I am afraid it will be an expensive
business. We shall have to retain counsel, perhaps two or even three
men, and their fees are not negligible. Then, as you can
imagine’--Mr. Clifford gave a wintry little smile--‘we also have to
live, or at all events we think so. There will unquestionably be
expense in hunting up witnesses, a private detective may have to be
employed, in short, the defence of a big case means heavy outlay.
Now, can your friend meet this? What are his circumstances
financially?’

‘I think he is all right,’ answered Martin, ‘but, in any case, the
money will be my affair. Felix may pay what he can. I shall be
responsible for the rest.’

Clifford looked at the speaker keenly.

‘Very handsome of you, Martin, I’m sure.’ He hesitated a moment as if
about to continue the subject, then, with a change of manner, he went
on:--

‘I think, in that case, you should see Felix and ascertain his plans.
If you can spare the time now, I shall go with you to Bow Street and
try and procure for you an immediate visiting order. If, after your
conversation, you find you require our assistance, we shall be very
pleased to take up the case; if not, you are perfectly free to go
elsewhere. Is that agreed?’

‘Thank you, Clifford. That’s all right. Nothing could be better.’

After introducing his prospective client to the authorities at the
famous police station, the lawyer excused himself on the ground of
another engagement, while Martin sat down to await the order. The
formalities took some time, and it was not till nearly five that the
door of Felix’s cell opened to admit his friend.

‘Martin!’ cried the unhappy inmate, springing up and seizing his
visitor’s hand in both his own. ‘But this is good of you! I hardly
dared to expect you.’

‘Couldn’t see a pal in a hole without butting in,’ answered the
doctor gruffly, somewhat affected by the warmth of the other’s
welcome. ‘You’re a nice one, getting yourself into such a mess, eh?
What have you been up to that’s raised this dust?’

Felix passed his hand wearily over his forehead.

‘My God, Martin,’ he groaned, ‘I don’t know. I’m absolutely at sea. I
know no more about the wretched business than you do. The proceedings
to-day were purely formal, so that the evidence against me--whatever
it can be--did not come out. I can’t conceive what they have got hold
of, that has made them suspect me.’

‘I’ve heard nothing about the case at all. I just came along to see
you when I saw what had happened.’

‘Martin, I can never thank you! I can never repay you! I thought of
writing to you to-day to ask your help, and I should probably have
done it to-morrow. But you can’t think what it means to me, your
coming without being asked. It means, for one thing, that you don’t
believe this abominable charge? Doesn’t it?’

‘Well, naturally. You keep your heart up and don’t get flustered.
You’ve got some friends left still. All the family are upset about
the thing. The mater’s shocked, and so are the boys. They all say for
you to cheer up, and that the mistake is sure to be put right soon.’

‘God bless them for that,’ cried Felix, rising and pacing the cell in
evident emotion. ‘Tell them--how much I appreciate--what all their
thought means to me.’

‘Rot!’ said the doctor shortly. ‘What would you expect? But now, I
have only a minute or two here, and what I want to ask you is this,
what plans have you made for your defence?’

‘Defence? None, I fear. I just haven’t been able to think about it. I
haven’t an idea who to turn to, or what to do. What would you advise?’

‘Clifford.’

‘Eh? What? I don’t follow.’

‘Employ Clifford, of Clifford and Lewisham. He’s a dry stick, but as
clever as they’re made, and a good sort. He’s your man.’

‘I don’t know him. Do you think he would take up the case?’

‘Sure. Fact is, I went around to ask him how I could get an order to
see you--I know him pretty well--and I pumped him. The firm would
take it on if they were asked, but that means himself, and you
couldn’t have a better man.’

‘Martin, you put new life into me! God bless you for all you’re
doing! Will you arrange it with him? But, wait a minute, can I afford
it? Are his fees very high?’

‘What can you afford?’

‘Oh, I don’t know. Say a thousand pounds.’

‘More than enough. I shall arrange it with him at once.’

The friends conversed for some minutes, and then a warder opened the
door of the cell. Martin’s time was up. He left Felix cheered by the
promise of a further visit, and with tears of thankfulness glistening
in his eyes.

Determined to lose no time in completing his work, Martin returned
direct to the offices of Messrs Clifford and Lewisham. But there the
day’s work was over, and all but one or two junior clerks had already
left. The doctor therefore made an appointment for the next day and,
with a glow of righteous self-satisfaction, went home to tell his
family what he had done.

On the following afternoon he again found himself in the solicitor’s
office.

‘Now,’ said Mr. Clifford, when it had been definitely agreed that his
firm was to take up the case, ‘I have to warn you that proceedings
will be slow. First, the prosecution will make up their case--get
depositions of the evidence, you know, and so on--and that will take
time. We, of course, shall also immediately start work, but it is
improbable we shall make much headway till we learn the full evidence
against us. Additional time will therefore be required for the
preparation of the defence. If Felix is returned for trial--and I
fear from what I have heard, he will be--weeks and months will
probably elapse before both sides are ready. You and I shall
therefore require to exercise patience.’

‘I can believe it,’ muttered the doctor. ‘You lawyers take the devil
of a time over everything.’

‘We can’t cover our mistakes like you, so we have to be careful,’
retorted the lawyer with his dry, wintry smile.

Martin smote his thigh.

‘Ha! ha!’ he laughed. ‘That’s good. You had me there. But I musn’t be
wasting your time. There were some things you wanted to speak to me
about?’

‘Yes,’ admitted Clifford, ‘a couple of points. Firstly, I propose to
retain Heppenstall--you know, Lucius Heppenstall, the K.C. He may
want one or two juniors. I suppose that is all right?’

‘Of course. You know what is best to be done.’

‘The other point is that I want you to tell me everything you
possibly can about Felix.’

‘As a matter of fact,’ returned Martin, ‘I can’t tell you very much.
I was just thinking over what I knew of him, and I was amazed it was
so little. We became acquainted about four years ago. Felix had just
taken St. Malo, an empty house a couple of hundred yards from my own,
and the first thing he did was to go and get pneumonia. I was called
in, but the attack was bad, and for a time it was touch and go with
him. However, he pulled through, and, during his convalescence, we
became very good friends. When he came out of the hospital I invited
him to my house for a week or two--he had only a not very
satisfactory housekeeper at St. Malo--and the family took to him,
till he became quite like one of ourselves. Since then he has been in
and out like a pet dog. He dines quite often, and, in return, insists
on taking the boys to the theatre, and the mater when she’ll go.’

‘He lives quite alone, you say?’

‘Quite, except for the housekeeper.’

‘And you haven’t met any of his people?’

‘None. I’ve never even heard of his people. I don’t think he has any.
If he has, he never speaks of them.’ Martin hesitated for a moment,
then went on: ‘It may be my fancy, but it has struck me that he seems
to avoid women, and the only cynical remarks I have heard him make
have been at their expense. I have often wondered if he has had some
love disappointment. But he has never hinted at such a thing.’

‘How does he live?’

‘He is an artist. He designs for some poster firm in the City, and he
draws for the better-class magazines. I do not know if he has private
means, but he seems to do well enough.’

‘Do you know anything about this extraordinary business of the cask?’

‘No, except this. On--let me see, what night was it? Monday, I
think--yes, Monday, the 5th of April, a couple of friends turned in,
and we wanted a rubber of bridge. I went round to St. Malo to see if
Felix would make a fourth. That was about 8.30 o’clock. At first he
hesitated, but afterwards he agreed to come. I went in and waited
while he changed. The study fire had just been freshly lighted and
the room, and indeed the whole house, was cold and cheerless. We
played bridge till nearly one. The next thing we heard was that he
was in St. Thomas’s Hospital, prostrated from a mental shock. Not
professionally, but as a friend, I went to see him, and then he told
me about the cask.’

‘And what did he tell you?’

‘He said he had had a letter saying a cask of money was being sent
him--he will tell you the details himself--and that he had just got
this cask from the steamer and brought it to St. Malo when I called
on that Monday evening. The reason he hesitated about leaving home
was that he was on tenterhooks to unpack the cask.’

‘Why did he not tell you about it?’

‘I asked him that, and he said he had had trouble with the steamer
people about getting it away, and he did not want any one to know
where the cask was, lest it should get round to these steamer folk.
But I would rather he would tell you about that himself.’

‘I shall ask him, but I want to hear from you anything you know
personally about it.’

‘Well, there is nothing more than that.’

‘Can you tell me anything of his friends?’

‘Nothing. I think only twice in all the years I have known him have I
met acquaintances of his, in each case artists who were looking at
the paintings in his studio, and who I know did not stay the night.
Whom he met during the day I can’t tell.’

The lawyer sat silent for some minutes.

‘Well,’ he said at length, ‘I think that is all we can do to-day.
I’ll let you know how things go on, but, as I warned you before, the
business will be slow.’

With a hearty handshake and a word of thanks the doctor took his
leave, while Clifford sat down to write to Heppenstall, K.C., to know
if he would take up the case.




CHAPTER XXII

FELIX TELLS A SECOND STORY

The next day Mr. Clifford was occupied with various technical
formalities, and in obtaining from the authorities such information
as was then available about the case, and it was not till the
following morning he set out to make the acquaintance of his client.
He found him seated in his cell, his head on his hands, and an
expression of deep gloom upon his face. The two men talked
generalities for some time, and then the lawyer came to business.

‘Now, Mr. Felix,’ he said, ‘I want you please to tell me everything
you know of this unhappy affair--everything, no matter how seemingly
minute or unimportant. Remember--I cannot impress it on you too
strongly--for a man in your position it is suicidal to withhold
information. Keep nothing back. Your confidence will be as safe as
the confessional. If you have made mistakes, done foolish things, or
criminal things, or even--forgive me--if you have committed the crime
you are charged with, tell me the whole truth. Else I shall be a
blind man leading the blind, and we shall both have our fall.’

Felix rose to his feet.

‘I will do so, Mr. Clifford. I will keep nothing back. And first,
before we go on to the details, one point must be settled.’ He raised
his hand. ‘I swear to you, in the presence of Almighty God, in whom I
believe, that I am innocent of this crime.’ He sat down and then
continued: ‘I don’t ask you if you believe me; I am willing to leave
that till afterwards, but I want now, at the commencement of our
intercourse, to put that fact as it were on record. I absolutely and
categorically deny all knowledge of this hateful and ghastly crime.
Now let us get on.’

‘I am glad you have made this statement and in this way, Mr. Felix,’
said the lawyer, who was impressed by his client’s manner and
earnestness. ‘Now, please, begin at the beginning and tell me with
all the detail you can, what you know of the matter.’

Felix had the gift of narration, and, apart from the appeal to
Clifford’s professional instincts, he held the lawyer enthralled as
he related the strange story of his experiences.

‘I hardly know where to begin,’ he said. ‘The first thing directly
bearing on the affair was a meeting between myself and some friends
at the Café Toisson d’Or in Paris, but before I come to that I think
I ought to explain just who I am and how I, a Frenchman, come to be
living in London. I think this is necessary, as the question of my
previous knowledge of poor Annette Boirac is certain to come up. What
do you say, Mr. Clifford?’

‘Necessary to tell this?’ thought the lawyer, to whom the fact that
Felix had had knowledge of the dead woman came as an ugly discovery.
‘Why, my good fellow, no other point in the whole case is likely to
be more important for you.’ But aloud he only said:--

‘Yes, I consider it most necessary.’

‘Very good, then. As I said, I am a Frenchman, and I was born in
Avignon in 1884. I was always keen on drawing, and, as my teachers
thought there was promise in my work, I early moved to Paris and
entered the _atelier_ of M. Dauphin. I studied there for several
years, living in a small hotel off the Boule Miche. My parents were
both dead, and I had inherited a little money--not much, but enough
to live on.

‘Amongst those working at the art school was a young fellow called
Pierre Bonchose. He was some four years my junior, and was an
attractive and thoroughly decent chap. We became close friends,
eventually sharing the same room. But he was not much good at his
work. He lacked perseverance, and was too fond of supper parties and
cards to settle down seriously to paint. I was not, therefore,
surprised when one day he told me he was fed up with art, and was
going into business. It seemed he had applied to an old friend of his
father’s, the senior partner of Messrs. Rôget, the wine exporters of
Narbonne, and had been offered a position in that firm, which he had
decided to accept.

‘But a month or two before he left Paris he had introduced to the
_atelier_ a new pupil, his cousin, Mlle. Annette Humbert. They seemed
more like brother and sister than cousins, and Bonchose told me that
they had been brought up together, and had always been what you
English call “pals.” This, Mr. Clifford, was none other than the
unfortunate young lady who afterwards became Mme. Boirac.

‘She was one of the loveliest girls that ever breathed. From the
first moment I saw her I admired her as I had never before admired
any one. As Fate would have it we were both making certain pastel
studies and, being thus thrown together, we became interested in each
other’s work. The inevitable happened, and I fell deeply in love with
her. She did not discourage me, but, as she was kind and gracious to
every one, I hardly dared to hope she could care for me. At last, to
make a long story short, I took my courage in both hands and
proposed, and I could hardly believe my good fortune when she
accepted me.

‘It then became necessary for me to approach her father. M. Humbert
came of an old and distinguished family, endowed with much pride of
birth. He was well off, though not rich, and lived almost in state in
his old château at Laroche, occupying a leading position in the local
society. To broach such a subject to him would have been an ordeal
for any one, but for me, who lacked so many of the social advantages
he possessed, it was a veritable nightmare. And my forebodings were
not disappointed. He received me courteously, but scouted my
proposal. Mlle. Humbert was too young, she did not yet know the world
nor her own mind, he had other plans for her future, and so on. Also,
he delicately indicated that my social standing and means hardly
fitted me to enter a family of such age and traditions as his own.

‘I need not try to describe the effect this decision had upon both of
us, suffice it to say that Annette, after a stormy scene, submitted
to her father’s authority, leaving the art school and going for an
indefinite visit to an aunt in the southern provinces. I, finding
life without her insupportable in my old haunts, also left Paris,
and, coming to London, obtained a position as artist with Messrs.
Greer and Hood, the advertisement poster printers of Fleet Street.
What with their salary and my spare time drawings for _Punch_ and
other papers, I soon found myself in receipt of over a thousand a
year, and then realised one of my ambitions and moved to a small
villa in the suburbs, buying at the same time a two-seater to take me
to and from my work. This villa, St. Malo, was situated near Brent,
on the Great North Road. Here I settled down, alone except for an
elderly housekeeper. I fitted up a large attic as a studio where I
began studies for a picture I had in mind.

‘But before I had been a month in my new home, I developed a nasty
attack of pneumonia. Martin, who was the nearest doctor, was called
in, and so began the friendship from which your presence here to-day
has resulted.

‘I lived a somewhat humdrum existence for some two years, and then
one morning I had a pleasant surprise in the shape of a visit from my
old friend, Pierre Bonchose. He explained that, having done pretty
well in business, he had been sent to represent permanently his firm
in London. He also told me that after a year of what he called
“sulking,” his cousin Annette had, at her father’s desire, married a
M. Boirac, a wealthy manufacturer, that he had seen her coming
through Paris, and that she appeared to be quite happy.

‘Bonchose and I resumed our former intimacy, and, during the next
summer, that is, two years ago, we had a walking tour through
Cornwall. I mention this because of an incident which occurred near
Penzance, and which profoundly modified our relations. While bathing
in a deserted cove of that rocky coast, I was caught in an off-shore
current and, in spite of all my efforts, found myself being carried
out to sea. Bonchose, hearing my shouts, swam out after me and at the
imminent risk of his own life assisted me back into still water.
Though he made light of the matter, I could not forget the danger he
had faced to save me, and I felt I had incurred a debt which I should
be glad of an opportunity to pay.

‘But though, as I have said, I had settled down in London, I did not
by any means entirely desert Paris. First at long intervals, but
afterwards more frequently, I ran over to see my friends and to keep
myself in touch with artistic circles in France. About eight months
ago, on one of these visits, it happened that I dropped into an
exhibition of the work of a famous sculptor, and there I incidentally
came across a man whose conversation interested me extremely. His
hobby was statuary, and he was clearly an expert in his subject. He
told me he had amassed one of the largest private collections in the
world, and as we became more intimate he invited me to dine that
evening and see it. I went, and on arrival he introduced me to his
wife. You can imagine my feelings, Mr. Clifford, when I found she was
none other than Annette. Acting on the impulse of the moment, we met
as strangers, though I am sure that, had M. Boirac not been so full
of his collection, he must have noticed our embarrassment. But as we
sat at dinner I found that, after the first shock of recognition, her
presence left me cold. Though I still profoundly admired her, my
infatuation had passed away, and I realised that whatever love I
might have had for her was dead. And from her manner I felt sure her
feelings towards myself had undergone a similar change.

‘M. Boirac and I became good friends over his collection, and, on his
invitation, I several times repeated my call during subsequent visits
to Paris.

‘That, Mr. Clifford, is all of what I may call my preliminary
history. I am afraid it is rather involved, but I have tried to make
it as clear as I could.’

The lawyer bowed gravely.

‘Your statement is perfectly clear. Pray proceed.’

‘I come now,’ went on Felix, ‘to the events connected with the cask
and therefore apparently with the tragedy. I think it will be better
to tell you these in their chronological order, even though this
makes my story seem a little disconnected?’

Again Mr. Clifford inclined his head and the other resumed:--

‘On Saturday, 13th March, I crossed to Paris for the week-end,
returning the following Monday morning. On the Sunday afternoon I
happened to drop into the Café Toisson d’Or in the rue Royale and
there found a group of men, with most of whom I was acquainted. They
were talking about the French Government lotteries, and in the course
of conversation one of them, a M. Alphonse Le Gautier, said to me,
“Why not have a little flutter with me?” I ridiculed the idea at
first, but afterwards agreed to enter a thousand francs jointly with
him. He undertook to arrange the matter, the profits, if any, being
halved between us. I paid him over my five hundred francs and,
believing it was the last I should hear of the affair, dismissed it
from my mind.

‘A week after my return to England I had a visit from Bonchose. I saw
at once he was in trouble and after a while it all came out. It
seemed he had been losing heavily at cards, and to meet his
liabilities he had gone to moneylenders, who were now pressing him
for repayment. In answer to my questions, he explained that he had
paid off all his loans with the exception of one for £600. That sum
he was utterly unable to raise, and if he failed to procure it before
the 31st, that was, in about a week, he was a ruined man. I was much
annoyed, for I had helped him out of similar scrapes twice before, on
each of which occasions he had given me his word not to play again. I
felt I could not go on throwing good money after bad, and yet because
of our friendship and the debt I owed him for saving my life, I could
not see him go to the wall. Divining what was in my mind, he assured
me he had not come to beg, saying that he realised I had already done
more for him than he deserved. Then he said he had written to Annette
telling her the circumstances, and asking, not for a gift, but for a
loan on which he would pay four per cent interest. I talked to him
seriously, offering no help, but asking him to keep me advised of how
things went on. But though I did not tell him, I decided I would pay
the £600 rather than see him stuck.

‘“I am going to Paris on Friday,” I ended up, “and hope to dine at
the Boirac’s on Saturday. If Annette speaks to me on the subject, I
shall tell her you are making an unholy mess of things.”

‘“Don’t put her against helping me,” he pleaded. I said I would not
influence her at all, and then he asked me when I was returning, so
that he could meet me and hear what had been said. I told him I would
cross by Boulogne on Sunday.

‘That week-end, a fortnight after the meeting in the Café Toisson
d’Or, I was again in the French capital. On the Saturday morning as I
sat in the Hotel Continental meditating a visit to M. Dauphin’s
_atelier_, a note was handed to me. It was from Annette, and in it
she said she wanted to speak to me in private, asking if I could come
at 7.30 that night, instead of the dinner hour of 7.45, and requiring
a verbal reply. I gave the necessary assurance to the messenger, who
proved to be Annette’s maid, Suzanne.

‘I reached the Boirac’s house at the appointed hour, but I did not
see Annette. As I entered, M. Boirac was passing through the hall,
and, seeing me, he invited me into his study to look at an engraving
which had been sent him on approval. Naturally, I could not refuse.
We went to the study and examined the picture. But there was another
object in the study which I also saw and commented on. Standing on
the carpet was a large cask, and, Mr. Clifford, you will hardly
believe me when I tell you it was either the identical cask which was
sent me containing poor Annette’s body, or else one so similar as to
be indistinguishable!’

Felix paused to let this significant statement, as he evidently
considered it, sink into the lawyer’s mind. But the latter only bowed
and said:--

‘Pray proceed, Mr. Felix, with your statement.’

‘I was interested in the cask, as it seemed an unusual object to find
in a study. I asked Boirac about it, and he explained that he had
just purchased a piece of statuary, and that the cask was simply the
special kind of packing case in which it had been sent home.’

‘Did he describe the statue?’ asked the lawyer, interrupting for the
first time.

‘No, except to say it was a fine group. He promised to show it to me
on my next visit.’

‘Did he tell you from whom he had purchased it, or what price he had
paid?’

‘Neither; the matter was only referred to incidentally as we were
leaving the room.’

‘Thank you. Pray continue.’

‘We then went to the salon, but, as several visitors had already
arrived, I could not, at that time, get a private word with Annette.

‘The dinner was an important social affair, the Spanish Ambassador
being the principal guest. Before it was over M. Boirac was called
from the house, owing to an accident having taken place at his works.
He apologised for leaving, promising to return speedily, but after a
time a telephone message came to say the accident had been more
serious than he had supposed, and he would be detained till very late
or even all night. The guests began to leave about eleven, but, in
obedience to a sign from Annette, I remained till all had gone. Then
she told me she had received a letter from Bonchose which had much
upset her. She did not mind his having got into difficulties--indeed,
she thought a fright would do him good; but she was really troubled
lest he might become a confirmed gambler. She wished for my candid
opinion of him.

‘I told her exactly what I thought; that there wasn’t a bit of real
harm in him, but that he had got into a bad set and that his only
chance was to break with it. She agreed with me, saying he should not
be helped until this breach had actually been made. We then discussed
where the money was to come from. She, it appeared, could lay her
hands on only £300, and, as she felt M. Boirac would disapprove, she
did not wish to ask him for the remainder. She therefore proposed to
sell a couple of her jewels--her own private property--and she asked
me to undertake the matter for her. But I could not bring myself to
agree to this, and I said that if she would advance the £300 she had,
I would find the balance. At first she would not hear of it, and we
had quite a heated argument. Finally I carried my point, and she went
upstairs and brought down the money. I took my leave immediately
afterwards, promising to let her know how the matter ended. She was
much affected, for she was sincerely attached to him. The next day,
Sunday, I returned to London.’

‘I think you said, Mr. Felix,’ interrupted Clifford, ‘that the last
of the guests left at eleven?’

‘Yes, about then.’

‘And at what time did you yourself leave?’

‘About quarter to twelve.’

‘Then your conversation lasted about three-quarters of an hour. Now,
did any one see you leave?’

‘No one except Annette. She came to the door with me.’

‘You returned to your hotel, I suppose?’

‘Yes.’

‘At what hour did you reach it?’

‘About half-past one, I should say.’

‘From Madame’s house to the Hotel Continental is about fifteen
minutes’ walk. What, then, did you do in the interval?’

‘I felt wakeful, and thought a stroll would be pleasant. I walked
across Paris; to the Place de la Bastille by the rue de Rivoli, and
back to the hotel by the Grands Boulevards.’

‘Did you meet any one you knew?’

‘No, not that I can recall.’

‘I am afraid this is important, Mr. Felix. Think again. Is there no
one that could testify to meeting you on this walk? No waiter or
other official, for example?’

‘No,’ said Felix, after a pause, ‘I don’t think I spoke to a soul,
and I certainly did not enter a café.’

‘You say you returned to London next day. Did you meet any one on the
journey you knew?’

‘Yes, but it will be no help to me. I met Miss Gladys Devine on the
Folkestone boat. But she cannot confirm this. As you must know, she
died suddenly a week later.’

‘Miss Gladys Devine? Not the celebrated Miss Devine, the actress?’

‘The same. I have met her at supper parties in Paris.’

‘But you must be able to get confirmation of that? So well known a
lady would be recognised wherever she went. But perhaps you visited
her private cabin?’

‘No, I saw her on the boat deck. She was sitting in the shelter of
one of the funnels. I joined her for about half an hour.’

‘But somebody must have seen you?’

‘Possibly, but possibly not. You see, it was horribly rough. Almost
every one was sick. People, anyway, weren’t walking about.’

‘What about her maids?’

‘I did not see them.’

‘Now, Mr. Felix, what you must think over when I leave you is, first,
what evidence can we get confirming your statement of how you spent
your time between 11.00 and 1.30 on the Saturday night? and second,
who saw you with Miss Devine on the Folkestone boat? In the meantime,
please continue your statement.’

‘Bonchose met me at Charing Cross. He was keen to know how I had
fared. We drove to his rooms, where I told him the whole thing. I
said I would hand him the £600 on condition he broke finally with his
gambling friends. He assured me the breach had already been effected,
and I therefore gave him the money. We then drove to the Savoy and,
after a rather early dinner, I left him and went home.’

‘At what hour?’

‘About 8.30.’

‘How did you go?’

‘I took a taxi.’

‘From where?’

‘The Savoy commissionaire called it.’

‘Yes?’

‘The next thing was I received an astonishing letter,’ and Felix went
on to tell the lawyer about the typewritten letter signed ‘Le
Gautier,’ his preparations to obtain the cask, his visit to St.
Katherine’s Docks, his interviews with the clerk, Broughton, and the
manager of the dock office, his ruse to get the I. and C.’s
notepaper, the forging of the letter to Harkness, the removal of the
cask to St. Malo, his dining at Dr. Martin’s, the midnight interview
with Burnley, the disappearance of the cask, its final recovery, its
unpacking, and the discovery of its terrible contents. ‘That, Mr.
Clifford,’ he ended up, ‘is every single thing I know about the
affair, good, bad, or indifferent.’

‘I congratulate you on the clear way you have made your statement,’
returned the solicitor. ‘Now, excuse me while I think if there is
anything further I want to ask you.’

He slowly turned over the rather voluminous notes he had taken.

‘The first point,’ he went on at length, ‘is the question of your
intimacy with Madame Boirac. Can you tell me how many times you saw
her since her marriage?’

Felix considered.

‘About half a dozen, I should say, or perhaps eight or even nine. Not
more than nine certainly.’

‘Excepting on the night of the dinner, was her husband present on all
these occasions?’

‘Not all. At least twice I called in the afternoon and saw her alone.’

‘I think I need hardly ask you, but answer me fully all the same.
Were there at any time any tender or confidential passages between
you and Madame?’

‘Absolutely none. I state most positively that nothing passed between
us which Boirac might not have seen or heard.’

Again Clifford paused in thought.

‘I want you now to tell me, and with the utmost detail, exactly how
you spent the time between your leaving Bonchose after dinner on the
Sunday night of your return from Paris, and your meeting the cask at
St. Katherine’s Docks on the following Monday week.’

‘I can do so easily. After leaving Bonchose I drove out to St. Malo,
as I told you, arriving about 9.30. My housekeeper was on holidays,
so I went straight over to Brent village and arranged with a
charwoman to come in the mornings and make my breakfast. This woman
had acted in a similar capacity before. I myself was taking a week’s
holidays, and each day I passed in the same manner. I got up about
half-past seven, had breakfast, and went to my studio to paint. The
charwoman went home after breakfast, and I got my own lunch. Then I
painted again in the afternoon, and in the evening went into town for
dinner and usually, but not always, a theatre. I generally got back
between eleven and twelve. On Saturday, instead of painting all day,
I went into town and arranged about meeting the cask.’

‘Then at ten o’clock on Wednesday you were painting in your studio?’

‘That is so, but why that day and hour?’

‘I will tell you later. Now, can you prove that? Did any one call in
the studio, or see you there?’

‘No one, I’m afraid.’

‘What about the charwoman? What is her name, by the way?’

‘Mrs. Bridget Murphy. No, I don’t think she could tell where I was.
You see, I practically did not see her at all. My breakfast was ready
when I came down, and when I had finished I went direct to the
studio. I don’t know when she went home, but I should think it was
fairly early.’

‘What time did you breakfast?’

‘Eight nominally, but I wasn’t always very punctual.’

‘Do you remember, and have you any way of proving, what time you had
breakfast on this particular Wednesday?’

Felix thought over the question.

‘No,’ he answered, ‘I don’t think so. There was nothing to
distinguish that morning from the others.’

‘The point is important. Perhaps Mrs. Murphy would remember?’

‘Possibly, but I hardly think so.’

‘No one else could prove it? Were there no callers? No tradesmen’s
messengers?’

‘None. One or two people rang, but I didn’t bother. I was expecting
no one, and I just let them ring.’

‘An unfortunate omission. Now, tell me, where did you dine in town
and spend the evenings?’

‘I’m afraid a different restaurant each night, and naturally a
different theatre.’

By dint of further questions Clifford obtained a list of all the
places his client had visited during the week, his intention being to
go round them in turn in search of material to build up an alibi. He
was very disappointed with all he had heard, and the difficulties of
his task seemed to be growing. He continued this examination.

‘Now, this typewritten letter, signed Le Gautier. Did you believe it
was genuine?’

‘I did. I thought the whole thing absurd and annoying, but I did not
doubt it. You see, I had actually entered for the lottery with Le
Gautier, and fifty thousand francs was the sum we would have made,
had we been lucky. I did think at first it was a practical joke on Le
Gautier’s part, but he is not that kind of man, and I at last
concluded it was genuine.’

‘Did you write or wire to Le Gautier?’

‘No. I got the letter late one evening on my return home. It was too
late to do anything then, but I intended to wire next morning that I
would go over, and not to send the cask. But next morning’s post
brought a card, also typewritten, and signed “Le Gautier,” saying the
cask had actually been despatched. I forgot to mention that in my
statement.’

Clifford nodded and again referred to his notes.

‘Did you write a letter to Messrs. Dupierre of Paris, ordering a
statue to be sent to you, to the West Jubb Street address?’

‘No.’

‘Do you recollect the blotter on your study desk at St. Malo?’

‘Why, yes,’ returned Felix, with a look of surprise.

‘Did you ever let that blotter out of your possession?’

‘Not to my knowledge.’

‘Did you ever take it to France?’

‘Never.’

‘Then how, Mr. Felix,’ asked the lawyer slowly, ‘how do you account
for the fact that the blotted impression of such a letter, in your
handwriting, was found on the blotter?’

Felix sprang to his feet.

‘What?’ he cried. ‘What’s that you say? A letter in my handwriting? I
don’t believe it! It’s impossible!’

‘I have seen it.’

‘You have seen it?’ The speaker moved excitedly about the cell,
gesticulating freely. ‘Really, Mr. Clifford, this is too much. I tell
you I wrote no such letter. You are making a mistake.’

‘I assure you, Mr. Felix, I am making no mistake. I saw not only the
impression on your pad, but also the original letter itself, which
had been received by Messrs. Dupierre.’

Felix sat down and passed his hand across his brow, as if dazed.

‘I cannot understand it. You can’t have seen a letter from me,
because no such exists. What you saw must have been a forgery.’

‘But the impression on the blotter?’

‘Good Heavens, how do I know? I tell you I know nothing about it. See
here,’ he added, with a change of tone, ‘there’s some trick in it.
When you say you’ve seen these things I’m bound to believe you. But
there’s a trick. There must be.’

‘Then,’ said Clifford, ‘if so, and I’m inclined to agree with you,
who carried out the trick? Some one must have had access to your
study, either to write the letter there, or to abstract your blotter
or a page of it which could afterwards be replaced. Who could that
have been?’

‘I don’t know. Nobody--or anybody. I can think of no one who would do
such a thing. When was the letter written?’

‘It was received by Dupierre on Tuesday morning, 30th March. It bore
a London postmark, therefore it must have been posted on Sunday night
or Monday. That would be either the day or the day after you returned
to London, after the dinner.’

‘Any one could have got into the house while I was away. If what you
say is true, some one must have, but I saw no traces.’

‘Now, Mr. Felix, who is Emmie?’

Felix stared.

‘Emmie?’ he said. ‘I don’t understand. Emmie what?’

Clifford watched the other keenly as he replied,--

‘Your heartbroken Emmie.’

‘My dear Mr. Clifford, I haven’t the slightest idea what you’re
talking about. ‘Your heartbroken Emmie?’ What under the sun do you
mean?’

‘It should be clear enough, Mr. Felix. Who was the girl that wrote to
you recently imploring you not to desert her, and who signed herself,
“Your heartbroken Emmie”?’

Felix gazed at his visitor in amazement.

‘Either you’re mad or I’m mad,’ he said slowly. ‘I have had no letter
from any girl asking me not to desert her, and I have had no letter
on any subject from any one signing herself Emmie. Really, I think
you might explain yourself.’

‘Now tell me something else, Mr. Felix. You possess, I understand,
two navy-blue suits?’

The astonishment on the artist’s face did not lesson as he assented.

‘I want to know now when you last wore each of those suits.’

‘As it happens, I can tell you. One of them I wore on my Paris trip
and again on the following Saturday when I went to town to arrange
about the cask, as well as on the Monday and following days till I
went to hospital. I am wearing it to-day. The other blue suit is an
old one, and I have not had it on for months.’

‘I’ll tell you now why I ask. In the coat pocket of one of your blue
suits, evidently, from what you tell me, the old one, was found a
letter beginning, “My dearest Léon,” and ending, “Your heartbroken
Emmie,” and in it the writer said--but here I have a copy of it, and
you may read it.’

The artist looked over the paper as if in a dream. Then he turned to
the other.

‘I can assure you, Mr. Clifford,’ he said earnestly, ‘that I am as
much in the dark as you about this. It is not my letter. I never saw
it before. I never heard of Emmie. The whole thing is an invention.
How it got into my pocket I cannot explain, but I tell you positively
I am absolutely ignorant of the whole thing.’

Clifford nodded.

‘Very good. Now there is only one other thing I want to ask you. Do
you know the round-backed, leather-covered arm-chair which stood
before the plush curtain in your study?’

‘Yes.’

‘Think carefully, and tell me who was the last lady to occupy it.’

‘That doesn’t require much thought. No lady has ever sat in it since
I bought it. Very few ladies have been in St. Malo since I took it,
and these without exception were interested in art and were in the
studio only.’

‘Now, don’t be annoyed, Mr. Felix, when I ask you once more, did
Madame Boirac ever sit in that chair?’

‘I give you my solemn word of honour she never did. She was never in
the house, and I believe I am right in saying she was never in
London.’

The lawyer nodded.

‘Now I have another unpleasant thing to tell you. Caught in the hem
of that curtain and hidden by the chair, a pin was found--a diamond
safety pin. That pin, Mr. Felix, was attached to the shoulder of
Madame Boirac’s dress on the night of the dinner party.’

Felix, unable to speak, sat staring helplessly at the lawyer. His
face had gone white, and an expression of horror dawned in his eyes.
There was silence in the dull, cheerless cell, whose walls had heard
so many tales of misery and suffering. Clifford, watching his client
keenly, felt the doubts which had been partly lulled to rest, again
rising. Was the man acting? If so, he was doing it extraordinarily
well, but. . . . At last Felix moved.

‘My God!’ he whispered hoarsely. ‘It’s a nightmare! I feel helpless.
I am in a net, and it is drawing close round me. What does it mean,
Mr. Clifford? Who has done this thing? I didn’t know any one hated
me, but some one must.’ He made a gesture of despair. ‘I’m done for.
What can help me after that? Can you see any hope, Mr. Clifford? Tell
me.’

But whatever doubts the lawyer felt he kept to himself.

‘It is too soon to come to any conclusion,’ he answered in a
matter-of-fact tone. ‘In cases of difficulty such as this, I have
frequently known some small fact to come out, perhaps accidentally,
which has cleared up the whole affair. You must not despair. We are
only at the beginning. Wait for a week or two, and then I’ll tell you
what I think.’

‘Bless you, Mr. Clifford. You put heart into me. But this matter of
the pin. What can it mean? There is some terrible conspiracy against
me. Can it ever be unravelled?’

The lawyer arose.

‘That’s what we have to try and do, Mr. Felix. I’m afraid I must be
off now. Do as I say, keep up your heart, and if you can think of any
evidence supporting your statements, let me know.’

Having shaken hands, Mr. Clifford withdrew.




CHAPTER XXIII

CLIFFORD GETS TO WORK

When Clifford had finished dinner that evening, he went to his study,
and drawing a large arm-chair up to the fire, for the evenings were
still cold, he lit a cigar and composed himself to master the details
of his new case. To say that he was disappointed with Felix’s
statement would not be to give a true indication of his state of
mind. He was woefully chagrined. He had hoped and expected that his
client would tell him something that would instantly indicate the
line the defence should take, and instead of that he was puzzled to
know where any defence at all was to come from.

And the more he thought over it, the worse the outlook seemed. He
went over the facts in order, marshalling them in his mind and
weighing the bearing of each on the question of Felix’s innocence or
guilt.

There was first of all the fundamental question of what had taken
place in the house in the Avenue de l’Alma between 11.00 p.m. and
1.15 a.m. on the night of the dinner party. At 11.00 Annette Boirac
was alive and well; at 1.15 she had disappeared. Felix was the last
person, so far as was known, to see her alive, and it was not
unreasonable to have expected him to have thrown some light on her
fate. But he hadn’t.

It was true he had explained the motive for his interview with
Madame. Confirmation of the truth of this, Clifford thought, should
be obtainable from an investigation of the affairs of Bonchose. But
even if it was established, he did not see how it would help his
client. It would not prove him innocent. Indeed, it might be argued
that this very discussion had been the indirect cause of the
elopement, if such took place. It had given Felix an opportunity to
see Madame alone which otherwise he might not have had. And who could
tell what dormant passions that private interview might not have
aroused? No. There was no help here.

And the remainder of Felix’s statement was equally unfruitful. He had
said that after conversing with the lady till 11.45 p.m., he had
walked about Paris till half-past one. But by a singular coincidence
he had not been seen leaving the house, he had not met any one he
knew, and he had not been anywhere he was known. Was this, Clifford
wondered, so singular a coincidence? Might it not simply mean that
Felix’s story was untrue?

Then he remembered the closing of the front door. François had heard
it shut at 1.00 a.m. If Felix left at 11.45, who shut it? As far as
he could see, either Felix must be lying when he said he left at
11.45, or else Madame must have gone out by herself at the later
hour. But the lawyer did not know which of these had happened, and
the worst of it was there seemed no way of finding out.

Equally useless for the defence was Felix’s identification of the
fur-coated lady on the Folkestone boat. Even had this been Miss
Devine, it did not prove Madame Boirac was not a traveller. Might not
Felix, travelling with Madame, have seen the actress on board, her
subsequent death suggesting his story? No, even if he could prove all
that the artist had said about the crossing, it would not help
matters.

But Felix’s failure to find an alibi for himself was much more
serious. Clifford had confidently expected a defence along these
lines, and he was more than disappointed. He ran over the facts. The
location of the man or men who had arranged the journeys of the cask
was known at two periods; on the Wednesday at 10.00 a.m. at Waterloo,
and on the Thursday at 5.15 p.m. at the Gare du Nord. Clifford got
out his Continental Bradshaw. To have been in Paris at the time
named, a Londoner must have left by the 9.00 a.m. from Charing Cross
on Thursday, and he could not have arrived back before 5.35 on Friday
morning. Therefore Felix had only to prove an alibi at 10.00 on
Wednesday morning, or between 9.00 on Thursday morning and 5.35 on
Friday morning, and the greatest part of the case against him would
be met. But this was just what he could not do.

Clifford turned to his notes of the artist’s statement. According to
it, at 10.00 a.m. on Wednesday, Felix had been painting in his
studio. But the chance of the housekeeper’s absence and the peculiar
arrangement under which the charwoman got breakfast prevented this
being proved. And like an idiot, Felix had heard people ringing at
the door, and, because he did not wish to be disturbed, had not
opened it. One of those callers might have saved him now.

And then, with regard to Thursday and Thursday night. To have caught
the 9.00 a.m. from Charing Cross, Felix must have left St. Malo at
not later than 8.50. According to his statement, his breakfast was
left ready for him at 8.00, and there certainly would not have been
time for him to eat it. But there was nothing to prevent him having
in two or three minutes dirtied the plates and carried away some
food, to give the impression he had had his meal. Here there was hope
of help from the charwoman. Clifford could not decide the point till
he had interviewed her.

He turned back to his notes. After breakfast, Felix, according to his
statement, had painted without ceasing, except for a cup of cocoa at
lunch time, until half-past six. He had then changed and gone to
town, dining alone at the Gresham. Though he had seen no one he knew
at the famous restaurant, there was a chance that a waiter or
commissionaire or other official might have recognised him. He had
left about nine and, feeling tired, he had returned straight home.
There, no one could know of his presence till 7.30 the next morning,
when Mrs. Murphy would expect to hear him answer her knock.

But if he had been to Paris, meeting the cask at the Gare du Nord, he
could have been home equally at 7.30 a.m. Therefore the evidence of
his answering the knock would be immaterial. Certainly if Felix were
telling the truth, the manner in which confirmation was eluding him
was most unfortunate. But was Felix telling the truth? . . .

Then there were those three discoveries of Burnley at St. Malo, the
‘Emmie’ letter, the impression on the blotsheet, and the pin. Any one
of these alone would have been highly damaging to Felix’s case; the
three together seemed overwhelming. And yet Felix had not attempted a
word of explanation. He had simply denied knowledge of all three. If
the accused man could not explain these damaging facts, how was
Clifford to set about it?

But nothing in the whole affair depressed the lawyer so much as the
admissions Felix had made about his previous relations with Madame
Boirac. It was, of course, true that Felix, a stranger introduced
into the Boirac household, might have fallen in love with Madame and
persuaded her to elope with him. But if Felix, instead of being a
stranger, could be shown to have been not only desperately in love
with, but actually formerly engaged to the mistress of the house, how
tremendously the probabilities of such an elopement would be
strengthened. What a picture a clever counsel could draw of this
lady, tied to a man whom perhaps she detested, and with whom life in
such case must have been an endless misery, brought unexpectedly in
touch with the man of her real choice. . . . And her lover, his
crushed-down feelings swelling up at the unlooked-for meeting, seeing
her languishing in this bondage. . . . Why, the elopement would be
amply accounted for. To Clifford it seemed that if the Crown got hold
of the facts he had learnt, Felix was a doomed man. Indeed, the more
he himself thought of the affair, the more doubtful of the artist’s
innocence he became. As far as he could see, Felix had only one
uncontrovertible point in his favour--his surprise on seeing the cask
opened. And this would prove a matter of medical testimony, and no
doubt there would be contradictory evidence. . . . The lawyer could
see very little light even here.

And then he reminded himself it was not his business to try Felix.
Innocent or guilty, he, Clifford, was there to do the best he could
for him. But what form was that best to take?

Till the morrow had dawned he sat smoking in his chair, turning the
case over in his mind, looking at the problem from every point of
view, still without much result. But though he could not yet see the
line his defence should follow, he was clear enough about his
immediate next step. Obviously he must first see Bonchose, Mrs.
Murphy, and the other persons of whom Felix had spoken, not only to
test the latter’s story, but also in the hope of learning some new
facts.

Accordingly, next morning saw the lawyer ascending the steps of the
house in Kensington in which the apartments of Mr. Pierre Bonchose
was situated. But here he met with a disappointment. Mr. Bonchose had
gone to the south of France on business and would not be home for
three or four days.

‘That explains why he has made no attempt to see Felix since his
arrest,’ said the lawyer to himself, as he turned away and hailed a
taxi with the idea of a call on the charwoman.

An hour later he reached the small village of Brent, on the Great
North Road, and was directed to Mrs. Murphy’s cottage. The door was
opened by a woman who had been tall, but was now shrunken, her sharp,
careworn features and gray hair indicating that her life had been a
struggle against odds.

‘Good morning,’ began the lawyer, courteously raising his hat. ‘You
are Mrs. Murphy?’

‘I am sir,’ returned the woman, ‘and would you come in?’

‘Thank you.’ He followed her into the small, poorly-furnished living
room, and sat cautiously down on the somewhat dilapidated chair she
pulled forward.

‘You know, I suppose,’ he went on, ‘that your neighbour, Mr. Felix of
St. Malo, has been arrested on a very serious charge?’

‘’Deed then, I do, sir. And sorry I was to hear of it. A fine, decent
man he was, too.’

‘Well, Mrs. Murphy, my name is Clifford, and I am the lawyer who is
going to defend Mr. Felix. I wondered if you would be good enough to
answer some questions, to help me in his defence?’

‘I would, sir, be glad to do it.’

‘You managed the house for him recently, while his housekeeper was
away?’

‘I did, sir.’

‘And when did Mr. Felix ask you to do that?’

‘On Sunday evening, sir. I was just thinking of going to bed when he
came to the door.’

‘Now tell me, please, exactly what you did each day at St. Malo.’

‘I went in the mornings, sir, and lit the fire and got his breakfast.
Then I did out his room and washed up and left his lunch ready. He
got his own lunch himself in the middle of the day, and went into
London for dinner at night.’

‘I see. At what hour did you reach the house in the mornings?’

‘About seven o’clock. I called him at half-past seven and he had
breakfast at eight.’

‘And about what hour did you leave?’

‘I could hardly be sure, sir. About half-past ten or eleven, or maybe
later.’

‘Can you remember the Wednesday of that week? I suppose you were at
St. Malo at ten o’clock?’

‘I was, sir. I was never left by ten any morning.’

‘Quite so. Now what I want to know is this: on that Wednesday morning
was Mr. Felix in the house at ten o’clock?’

‘So far as I know, he was, sir.’

‘Ah, but I want to be sure. Can you say positively he was there?’

‘Well, not to be certain, sir, I couldn’t.’

‘Now Thursday, Mrs. Murphy. Did you see Mr. Felix on Thursday?’

The woman hesitated.

‘I saw him two or three mornings,’ she said at last, ‘but I couldn’t
be sure whether it was on Thursday. It might have been, though.’

‘You couldn’t tell me at what hour he took his breakfast that
morning?’

‘Well, I could not, sir.’

It was evident to Clifford that Mrs. Murphy, though an intelligent
woman, would be no use to him as a witness. He remained at her house
for a considerable time, and was very probing and painstaking in his
questions. But all to no purpose. While she corroborated what Felix
had stated about his household arrangements, she dashed any hope the
lawyer might have had of establishing an alibi.

By the time he again reached the city it was one o’clock. He decided
he would lunch at the Gresham, and pursue his investigations among
the staff.

The head waiter, with whom he began, could not himself give any
information, but he took Felix’s photo round among his men, and at
last found one who had seen the artist. Felix, it appeared from this
man’s statement, had dined there one evening some five or six weeks
previously. The man, an Italian, remembered him because he had first
supposed him to be a compatriot. But, unfortunately, he could not fix
the date, and no one else, so far as Clifford could learn, had seen
the artist at all. Clifford had regretfully to admit that this
evidence, like Mrs. Murphy’s, was useless. In the lawyer’s private
judgment it undoubtedly tended to confirm Felix’s statement, and he
found himself more and more inclined to believe the Frenchman. But a
personal impression was one thing, and evidence in a court of law
another.

On reaching his office, he wrote to Bonchose, asking him to call on
urgent business immediately on his return to London.

The next day saw him again at Brent village. Felix had stated he had
gone by train to town each evening of the fateful week, and it had
occurred to the lawyer that possibly some of the railway officials
might have noticed him travelling. He made exhaustive inquiries and
at last found a ticket-collector who volunteered some information.
Felix, said this man, was a regular traveller. He went to town each
morning by the 8.57 and returned at 6.50 each evening. But the
collector had noticed that for some days he had not travelled by
these trains, but had instead gone up by the evening trains leaving
Brent at either 6.20 or 6.47. The collector went off duty at seven
o’clock, so he could not tell anything about Felix’s return. Nor
could any one else, so far as Clifford could ascertain. But
unfortunately the collector could not state how long it was since the
artist had changed his habits, still less could he say if he
travelled up to town on the Thursday evening in question.

Clifford then strolled to St. Malo in the hope of finding it was
overlooked by some other house, the occupants of which might have
seen the artist on the fateful Thursday. But here again he was
disappointed. There was no house in the immediate vicinity.

Puzzled as to his next step, the lawyer returned to his office. He
found pressing business of another kind awaiting him, and for the
remainder of that day, as well as the next two, he was too fully
occupied to turn his attention seriously to the murder case.

On the morning of the fourth day there was a letter from Mr. Lucius
Heppenstall, K. C. It was written from Copenhagen, and the barrister
explained that he was in Denmark on business and hoped to be back in
about a week, when he and Clifford could meet and go into the case
together.

Hardly had Clifford finished reading the letter when a young man was
announced. He was tall and slight, with dark hair and eyes, a small
black moustache and a short, hooked nose, which gave him something of
the appearance of a hawk.

‘Bonchose,’ said Clifford to himself, and he was not mistaken.

‘You have not heard of Mr. Felix’s arrest?’ he asked, as he waved his
visitor to an arm-chair and held out his cigarette case.

‘Not a word,’ replied Bonchose, speaking good English, but with a
foreign accent. He had a quick, vivacious manner, and moved sharply,
as if on wires. ‘I cannot tell you how utterly surprised and shocked
I was to get your note. But the thing is perfectly
absurd--outrageous! Any one that knew Felix would know he could not
commit such a crime. It is surely a misunderstanding that a very
short time will clear up?’

‘I fear not, Mr. Bonchose; I very much fear not. Unfortunately, the
case against your friend is strong. The evidence is admittedly
circumstantial, but it is strong for all that. Indeed, to be
perfectly candid with you, I do not for the moment see any good line
of defence.’

The young man made a gesture of amazement.

‘You horrify me, sir,’ he cried; ‘absolutely horrify me. You surely
do not mean to suggest there is any chance of a conviction?’

‘I am sorry to say that I do. There is a very great chance--unless a
good deal more comes to light than we know at present.’

‘But this is awful!’ He wrung his hands. ‘Awful! First it was poor
Annette and now Felix! But you don’t mean that nothing can be done?’
There was real concern and anxiety in the young man’s tone.

Mr. Clifford was satisfied. This man’s affection for and belief in
his friend were genuine. Felix could not be altogether a villain to
inspire such friendship. The lawyer changed his tone.

‘No, Mr. Bonchose,’ he answered. ‘I do not mean that. All I mean is
that the fight will not be easy. Mr. Felix’s friends will have to put
their backs into it. And it is to begin that fight I asked you to
call here as soon as you returned.’

‘I got back early this morning, and I was here before your office
opened. Take that as the measure of my willingness to help.’

‘I do not doubt it, Mr. Bonchose. And now I want you please to tell
me everything you can about Mr. Felix, and your own life, where it
has touched his. Also about your unhappy cousin, the late Madame
Boirac.’

‘I shall do so, and if at any point I am not clear, please ask me
questions.’

Beginning by explaining who he and Annette really were--children of a
younger daughter and the eldest son respectively of the late M. André
Humbert of Laroche--he gave an account of their childhood, their
early love of art, their moving to M. Dauphin’s school in Paris, the
meeting with Felix, and the latter’s love for Annette. Then he told
of his move to the wine merchant’s firm at Narbonne, his being sent
to London, his joy at again meeting Felix, his weakness for cards,
the help Felix had given him, and the recent serious money
difficulties into which he had fallen. He recounted his having
written on the matter to Annette, the hope expressed to Felix that he
would see her on the subject, his meeting the artist at Charing Cross
on the Sunday evening of his return to London, their dinner together,
the receipt of the £600, and finally Felix’s departure in a taxi for
St. Malo.

His whole statement, thought Clifford, was singularly like those of
Mrs. Murphy, the Gresham waiter, and the ticket-collector at Brent
Station, in that, while it confirmed what Felix had said and
strengthened the lawyer’s growing belief in the artist’s innocence,
it was of very little use for the trial. It was true that he,
Clifford, was now in a position to prove most of Felix’s statement,
but the worst of it was that most of Felix’s statement might be
proved without proving Felix’s innocence. So much so, indeed, that
Clifford could not yet quite banish the suspicion that the whole
thing was pre-arranged.

He questioned Mr. Bonchose exhaustively, but without learning
anything fresh. His visitor had not seen the artist on the Wednesday
or Thursday, and could not help towards the alibi. Finding that
nothing was to be gained by further conversation, Clifford bowed the
young man out, having promised to let him know how things progressed.




CHAPTER XXIV

MR. GEORGES LA TOUCHE

Some days later Mr. Clifford and Mr. Lucius Heppenstall, K.C.--who
were close personal friends--dined together at the former’s
residence, intending afterwards to have a long chat over the case.
Mr. Heppenstall had returned from Denmark rather earlier than was
expected, and had already studied the documents received from the
prosecution, as well as Clifford’s notes of what he had learnt. The
two men had together interviewed Felix and Bonchose and some other
small inquiries had been made, the only point of importance
discovered being that the late Miss Devine had crossed from Calais to
Folkestone on the Sunday in question and had been alone on deck, both
her maids having been helplessly ill. The meeting on this evening was
to formulate a policy, to decide on the exact line which the defence
should take.

The difficulty of this decision was felt by both men to be
considerable. In their previous cases there had nearly always been an
obvious defence. Frequently two distinct lines, or even three, had
been possible, the problem then being the selection of the best. But
here their difficulty was to find any defence at all.

‘The first thing we must settle,’ said Heppenstall, throwing himself
into an easy-chair, ‘is whether we are going to assume this fellow
Felix innocent or guilty. What is your own private opinion?’

‘I hardly know what to think,’ he answered finally. ‘I must admit
that Felix’s manner and personality impress me favourably. He
certainly told his story in a convincing way. Then these people that
we have recently seen confirm a great deal of what he said. Further,
they evidently like and believe in him. Look at Martin, for example.
He is a noisy, blustering fellow, but he is no fool. He knows Felix
well, and he believes in him to the extent of offering to guarantee
our fees to get him off. All that must count for something. Then
there is nothing inherently impossible in his story. It all might
have happened just as he says. And lastly, his admitted shock when
the cask was opened seems strongly in his favour.’

‘But?’

‘But? Well, there is all the rest of the case.’

‘Then you have no private opinion?’

‘Not definitely. My opinion inclines towards innocence, but I am by
no means sure.’

‘I rather agree with you,’ remarked the K.C. Then, after a pause, ‘I
have been thinking this thing over and I don’t for the life of me see
a chance of clearing him on the evidence. It is too strong. Why, if
it is true, it is overpowering. It seems to me our only hope is to
deny the evidence.’

‘To deny it?’

‘To deny it. You must admit that Felix is either guilty or the victim
of a plot.’

‘Of course.’

‘Very well. Let us stick to that. The evidence is not genuine because
Felix is the victim of a plot. How does that strike you?’

‘Well, you know, I shouldn’t be at all surprised if that was the
actual fact. I’ve thought over it a good deal, and the more I think
the more I begin to doubt those things that were found at St. Malo.
That letter from Emmie, the marks on the blotting paper, and the
diamond pin, they all strike me as being a little too conclusive to
be natural. Their very comprehensiveness suggests selection. Then
typewritten letters any one can produce. No, I shouldn’t wonder if
you’re on the right track.’

‘I think it’s our best defence, anyway.’

‘I think it’s our only defence. But, mind you, it’s an easy theory to
suggest, but a mighty hard one to establish.’

‘There’s only one way,’ Heppenstall declared, pouring himself out
some whisky from the jar at his elbow, ‘we must suggest the real
murderer.’

‘If we must find the real murderer we may as well let the case alone.
If Scotland Yard and the Sûreté couldn’t get him, we are not likely
to.’

‘You haven’t quite got me. I don’t say we must find him. It will be
enough to suggest him. All we have to do is to show that some other
person had a motive for Madame’s death, and could have murdered her
and carried out the plot against Felix. A doubt would then arise as
to which of the two was guilty, and, if that doubt was strong enough,
Felix would get the benefit of it.’

‘But that makes our problem no easier. The difficulty still lies in
the finding of this other person.’

‘We can only try; it may lead to something. Our first question then
is: If Felix is innocent, who might be guilty?’

There was silence for several seconds, then Heppenstall spoke again.

‘Who, perhaps I should say, is least unlikely to be guilty?’

‘I think there can be only one answer to that,’ returned Clifford.
‘In the very nature of the case a certain suspicion must attach to
Boirac. But the police were fully alive to that. From all we hear,
they went into it thoroughly and came to the conclusion he was
innocent.’

‘It depended on an alibi. But you know as well as I do alibis can be
faked.’

‘Undoubtedly, but they concluded this one wasn’t. We don’t know the
exact details, but it seems to have been fully tested.’

‘At all events, from the information available, I think we may assume
that if Felix is innocent, Boirac is guilty. There is no suggestion
of any third party being involved. If, then, we can show that Boirac
had a motive for the crime, and that he could have committed it and
made the plant, that’s all we want. We have not to prove him guilty.’

‘I suppose that is so. Then our next point is: What might have been
Boirac’s motive?’

‘That’s not hard to find. If Boirac found his wife was carrying on
with Felix, it might explain his desire to kill her.’

‘Yes, and it would give a two-fold reason for his working for Felix’s
conviction; first, self-defence by shifting over the suspicion, and,
second, revenge on the man who had spoilt his home.’

‘Quite. I think a plausible motive might be built up. Next let us
ask, When was the body put in the cask?’

‘The police say in London, because there was no opportunity
elsewhere.’

‘Yes, and to me it seems a quite sound deduction. Now, if that is
true, it follows that if Boirac killed his wife, he must have
travelled here to do it.’

‘But the alibi?’

‘Leave the alibi for a moment. Our defence must be that Boirac
followed his wife to London and murdered her there. Now can we
suggest possible details? He would arrive at his house on that Sunday
morning and find his wife gone, and a letter from her saying she had
eloped with Felix. What, then, would he do?’

Clifford leaned forward to stir the fire.

‘I have thought over that,’ he said somewhat hesitatingly, ‘and I
have worked out a possible theory. It is, of course, pure guesswork,
but it fits a number of the facts.’

‘Let’s hear it. Naturally our theories at present can only be
guesswork.’

‘I imagined Boirac, then, mad with his discovery on the Sunday
morning, sitting down and working out a plan for vengeance. He
perhaps goes on that morning to the Gare du Nord, and possibly sees
them start. He follows them to London. Or, at least, he sees and
follows Felix. Madame may have gone by another route. By the time he
finds they have reached St. Malo his plan is worked out. He learns
they are alone in the house, and he watches till he sees them go out.
Then he enters by, say, an open window, and, sitting down at Felix’s
desk, he forges a letter to Dupierre, ordering the companion statue
to that he has already purchased. He does this in order to obtain a
cask in which to pack Madame’s body, as he intends to murder her. To
throw suspicion on Felix, he copies the artist’s handwriting and
dries it on his blotting paper. For the same reason he signs it with
Felix’s name. But he does not give Felix’s address, as he wants to
get the cask himself.’

‘Good!’ interjected Heppenstall.

‘He then comes away with his letter, posts it, telephones to Paris to
know when and by what route the cask is being sent, and arranges a
carter to meet it and bring it near, but not to St. Malo, instructing
the carter to await him. Meantime, in some letter or telegram or
other trick, he gets Felix out of the way, leaving Madame alone in
the house. He rings, she opens the door, he forces his way in, and,
in that little round-backed chair in the study, he throttles her. The
pin falls out of the neck of the dress and lies unnoticed. Then he
goes back to the carter and brings the cask into the yard. He sends
the carter to the nearest inn for his dinner, unpacks and destroys
the statue, and packs the body. By this time the carter has returned,
and Boirac has him remove the cask, giving him instructions to send
it to Paris next morning. To compromise Felix still further he has
prepared the Emmie note, and he shoves this into the pocket of
Felix’s clothes.’

‘Good,’ said Heppenstall again.

‘He goes himself to Paris, gets hold of the cask at the Gare du Nord
and sends it to Felix from the rue Cardinet Goods Station. He works
out a tricky letter which will have the effect of making Felix claim
the cask. Felix does so and the police get on his track.’

‘By George, Clifford, you haven’t been idle. I shouldn’t wonder if
you are pretty near the thing. But if all that had taken place at St.
Malo, do you think Felix wouldn’t have said something about it?’

‘I think he would have. On the other hand, he may have wanted to save
Madame’s memory, and if so, he obviously couldn’t mention it?’

‘What about the charwoman?’

‘Well, that is another difficulty. But I think a clever woman could
have hidden her traces.’

‘The theory accounts for a great many things, and I think we must
adopt it as a basis for investigation. Let us now see what it
involves.’

‘It involves Boirac having been in London on the Sunday night or
Monday after the dinner party to learn what had taken place and to
write his letter, and again on the Wednesday to commit the murder and
arrange about the cask.’

‘Quite. It seems to me, then, our first business is definitely to
find out where Boirac was on these dates.’

‘He satisfied the police he was in Paris and Belgium.’

‘I know, but we agreed alibis could be faked. We’d better have the
thing gone into again.’

‘It will mean a detective.’

‘Yes, and what about La Touche?’

‘La Touche is the best man we could have, of course, but he’s fairly
expensive.’

Heppenstall shrugged his shoulders.

‘Can’t help that,’ he said. ‘We must have him.’

‘Very well. I’ll ask him to meet us--shall I say at three to-morrow?’

‘That will suit me.’

The two men continued discussing the affair until a clock struck
twelve, when Heppenstall made a move to return to town.

Mr. Georges La Touche was commonly regarded as the smartest private
detective in London. Brought up in that city, where his father kept a
small foreign book store, he learned till he was twelve the English
language and ideas. Then, on the death of his English mother, the
family moved to Paris, and Georges had to adjust himself to a new
environment. At twenty, he entered Cook’s office as a courier, and,
learning successively Italian, German, and Spanish, he gradually
acquired a first-hand acquaintanceship with Middle and South-Western
Europe. After some ten years of this work he grew tired of the
constant travelling, and, coming to London, he offered his services
to a firm of well-known private detectives. Here he did so well that,
on the death of the founder some fifteen years later, he stepped into
his place. He soon began to specialise in foreign or international
cases, for which his early training peculiarly fitted him.

But he was not much in appearance. Small, sallow, and slightly
stooped, he would have looked insignificant only for the strength of
the clear-cut features and the intelligence of the dark, flashing
eyes. Years of training had enabled him to alter his expression and
veil these tell-tale signs of power, and he had frequently found the
weak and insipid impression thus produced, an asset in allaying the
suspicions of his adversaries.

His delight in the uncommon and bizarre had caused him to read
attentively the details of the cask mystery. When, therefore, he
received Clifford’s telephone asking him to act on behalf of the
suspected man, he eagerly agreed, and cancelled some minor
engagements in order to meet the lawyers at the time appointed.

The important question of fees having been settled, Clifford
explained to the detective all that was known of the case, as well as
the ideas he and Heppenstall had evolved with regard to the defence.

‘What we want you to do for us, Mr. La Touche,’ he wound up, ‘is to
go into the case on the assumption that Boirac is the guilty man.
Settle definitely whether this is a possible theory. I think you will
agree that this depends on the truth of his alibi. Therefore, test
that first. If it cannot be broken down, Boirac cannot be guilty, and
our line of defence won’t work. And I need hardly say, the sooner you
can give us some information the better.’

‘You have given me a congenial task, gentlemen, and if I don’t
succeed it won’t be for want of trying. I suppose that is all to-day?
I’ll go over these papers and make the case up. Then I fancy I had
best go to Paris. But I’ll call in to see you, Mr. Clifford, before I
start.’

La Touche was as good as his word. In three days he was again in
Clifford’s room.

‘I’ve been into this case as far as is possible this side of the
Channel, Mr. Clifford,’ he announced. ‘I was thinking of crossing to
Paris to-night.’

‘Good. And what do you think of it all?’

‘Well, sir, it’s rather soon to give an opinion, but I’m afraid we’re
up against a tough proposition.’

‘In what way?’

‘The case against Felix, sir. It’s pretty strong. Of course, I expect
we’ll meet it all right, but it’ll take some doing. There’s not much
in his favour, if you think of it.’

‘What about the shock he got when the cask was opened? Have you seen
the doctor about it?’

‘Yes. He says the thing was genuine enough, but, sir, I’m afraid that
won’t carry us so far as you seem to think.’

‘To me it seems very strong. Look at it this way: the essence of a
shock is surprise; the surprise could only have been at the contents
of the cask; therefore Felix did not know the contents; therefore he
could not have put the body in; therefore surely he must be innocent?’

‘That sounds all right, sir, I admit. But I’m afraid a clever counsel
could upset it. You see, there’s more than surprise in a shock.
There’s horror. And it could be argued that Felix got both surprise
and horror when the cask was opened.’

‘How, if he knew what was in it?’

‘This way, sir. What was in it was hardly what he was expecting. It
might be said that he put in the body as he had seen the lady alive.
But she had been dead for a good many days when the cask was opened.
She would look a very different object. He would be filled with
horror when he saw her. That horror, together with the fact that he
would be all keyed up to act surprise in any case, would produce the
effect.’

Clifford had not thought of this somewhat gruesome explanation, and
the possibility of its truth made him uncomfortable. If the strongest
point in Felix’s favour could be met as easily as this, it was indeed
a black look-out for his client. But he did not voice his doubts to
his visitor.

‘If you can’t get enough to support the defence we suggest,’ he said,
‘we must just try some other line.’

‘I may get what you want all right, sir. I’m only pointing out that
the thing is not all plain sailing. I’ll cross, then, to-night, and I
hope I may soon have some good news to send you.’

‘Thank you. I hope so.’

The two men shook hands, and La Touche took his leave. That night he
left Charing Cross for Paris.




CHAPTER XXV

DISAPPOINTMENT

La Touche was a good traveller, and usually slept well on a night
journey. But not always. It sometimes happened that the rhythmic rush
and roar through the darkness stimulated rather than lulled his
brain, and on such occasions, lying in the wagon-lits of some
long-distance express, more than one illuminating idea had had its
birth. To-night, as he sat in the corner of a first-class compartment
in the Calais-Paris train, though outwardly a lounging and indolent
figure, his mind was keenly alert, and he therefore took the
opportunity to consider the business which lay before him.

His first duty obviously was to re-test Boirac’s alibi. He had learnt
what the authorities had done in the matter, and he would begin his
work by checking Lefarge’s investigation. For the moment he did not
see how to improve on his _confrère’s_ methods, and he could only
hope that some clue would present itself during his researches, which
his predecessor had missed.

So far he was in no doubt as to his proceedings, for this inquiry
into Boirac’s alibi had been directly asked for by his employers.
But, after that, he had been given a free hand to do as he thought
best.

He turned to what he considered the central feature of the case--the
finding of the body in the cask--and began to separate in his mind
the facts actually known about it from those assumed. Firstly, the
body was in the cask when the latter reached St. Katherine’s Docks.
Secondly, it could not have been put in during the journey from the
rue Cardinet Goods Station. So much was certain. But the previous
step in the cask’s journey was surmise. It was assumed that it had
been taken from the Gare du Nord to the rue Cardinet on a horse-cart.
On what was this assumption founded? Three facts. First, that it left
the Gare du Nord on a horse-cart; second, that it reached the rue
Cardinet in the same manner; and third, that such a vehicle would
have occupied about the time the trip had actually taken. The
assumption seemed reasonable, and yet. . . . He had to remember that
they were up against a man of no ordinary ability, whoever he might
be. Might not the cask have been taken by the first horse-cart to
some adjoining house or shed where the body could have been put in,
then sent by motor-lorry to some other shed near the Goods Station
and there transferred to a horse-cart again? This undoubtedly seemed
far-fetched and unlikely, nevertheless, the facts were not known,
and, he thought, they should be. He must find the carter who brought
the cask to the Goods Station. Then he would be certain where the
body was put in, and therefore whether the murder was committed in
London or Paris.

He noted a third point. The various letters in the case--and there
were several--might or might not be forgeries, and if the former, it
was obviously impossible for him to say off-hand who had written
them. But there was one letter which could not be a forgery--at least
in a certain sense. The Le Gautier letter which Felix said he had
received was done on a typewriter which could be identified. It was
hardly too much to assume that the man who typed that letter was the
murderer. Find the typewriter, thought La Touche, and the chances are
it will lead to the guilty man.

A further point struck him. If Boirac were guilty, might he not even
yet give himself away? The detective recalled case after case in his
own experience in which a criminal had, after the crime, done
something or gone somewhere that had led to his arrest. Would it be
worth while having Boirac shadowed? He considered the question
carefully and finally decided to bring over two of his men for this
purpose.

Here, then, were four directions in which inquiries might be made, of
which the first three at least promised a certain and definite
result. As the train slackened speed for the capital, he felt his
work was cut out for him.

And then began a period of tedious and unprofitable work. He was very
efficient, very thorough and very pertinacious, but the only result
of all his painstaking labours was to establish more firmly than ever
the truth of Boirac’s statements.

He began with the waiter at Charenton. Very skilfully he approached
the subject, and, painting a moving picture of an innocent man
falsely accused of murder, he gradually enlisted the man’s sympathy.
Then he appealed to his cupidity, promising him a liberal reward for
information that would save his client, and finally he soothed his
fears by promising that in no case should any statement he might make
get him into trouble. The waiter, who seemed a quiet, honest man, was
perfectly open, and readily replied to all La Touche’s questions, but
except on one point he stoutly adhered to his previous statement to
Lefarge. M. Boirac--whom he identified unhesitatingly from a
photograph--had lunched in the café about 1.30, and had then
telephoned to two separate places--he had heard the two numbers asked
for. As before, he made the reservation that he was not certain of
the day of the week, his impression having been that it was Monday
and not Tuesday, but he stated that in this he might easily be
mistaken. There was no shaking his evidence, and La Touche was
strongly of the opinion that the man was speaking the truth.

But as well as repeating his statement to Lefarge, the waiter added
one item of information that seemed important. Asked if he could not
recall either of the numbers demanded, he now said he recollected the
last two figures of one of them. They were 45. They caught his
attention because they were the café’s own telephone
number--Charenton 45. He could not recall either the previous figures
of the number nor yet the division. He had intended to tell this to
Lefarge, but being somewhat upset by the detective’s call, the point
had slipped his memory, and it was only when thinking the matter over
afterwards it had occurred to him.

For La Touche to look up the telephone directory was the work of a
few seconds. The number of Boirac’s house in the Avenue de l’Alma did
not suit, but when he looked up the Pump Construction Office he found
it was Nord 745.

Here was fresh confirmation. It was obvious the waiter could not have
invented his tale, and La Touche left utterly convinced that Boirac
had indeed lunched at the café and sent the messages.

As he was returning to the city it occurred to him that perhaps the
waiter’s impression was really correct and that Boirac had been in
the café on Monday afternoon instead of Tuesday. How was this point
to be ascertained?

He recollected how Lefarge had settled it. He had interviewed the
persons to whom Boirac had spoken, the butler and the head clerk, and
both were certain of that date. La Touche decided he must follow
Lefarge’s example.

Accordingly he called at the house in the Avenue de l’Alma and saw
François. He was surprised to find the old man genuinely grieved at
the news of Felix’s arrest. Few though the occasions had been in
which the two had met, something in the personality of the former had
in this case, as in so many others, inspired attachment and respect.
La Touche therefore adopted the same tactics as with the waiter, and,
on his explaining that he was acting for the suspected man, he found
François anxious to give all the help in his power.

But here again all that La Touche gained was confirmation of Boirac’s
statement. François recollected the telephone message, and he was
sure Boirac had spoken. He positively recognised the voice and
equally positively he remembered the day. It was Tuesday. He was able
to connect it with a number of other small events which definitely
fixed it.

‘Lefarge was right,’ thought the detective, as he strolled up the
Avenue de l’Alma. ‘Boirac telephoned from Charenton at 2.30 on
Tuesday. However, I may as well go through with the business.’

He turned his steps therefore towards the head office of the Avrotte
Pump Construction Company. Repeating Lefarge’s tactics, he watched
till he observed Boirac leave. Then he entered the office and asked
if he could see M. Dufresne.

‘I am afraid not, monsieur. I believe he has gone out,’ answered the
clerk who had come over to attend to him. ‘But if you will take a
seat for a moment I shall ascertain.’

La Touche did as he was asked, looking admiringly round the large
office with its polished teak furniture, its rows of vertical file
cabinets, its telephones, its clicking typewriters, and its
industrious and efficient-looking clerks. Now La Touche was not
merely a thinking machine. He had his human side, and, except when on
a hot scent, he had a remarkably quick eye for a pretty girl. Thus it
was that as this eye roamed inquisitively over the room, it speedily
halted at and became focused on the second row of typists, a girl of
perhaps two or three-and-twenty. She looked, it must be admitted,
wholly charming. Small, dark, and evidently vivacious; she had a
tiny, pouting mouth and an adorable dimple. Plainly dressed as became
her businesslike surroundings, there was, nevertheless, a daintiness
and chicness about her whole appearance that would have delighted an
even more critical observer than the detective. She flashed an
instantaneous glance at him from her dark, sparkling eyes, and then,
slightly elevating her pert little nose, became engrossed in her work.

‘I am sorry, monsieur, but M. Dufresne has gone home slightly
indisposed. He expects to be back in a couple of days, if you could
conveniently call again.’

La Touche hardly felt a proper appreciation of the clerk’s
promptness, but he thanked him politely and said he would return
later. Then, with a final glance at an averted head of dark,
luxuriant hair, he left the office.

The chief clerk’s absence was a vexatious delay. But, though it would
hold up his work on the alibi for a day or two, he might begin on one
of the other points which had occurred to him during the journey to
Paris. There was, for example, the tracing of the carter who brought
the cask from the Gare du Nord to the rue Cardinet. He would see what
could be done on that.

Accordingly he went out to the great Goods Station and, introducing
himself to the agent in charge, explained his errand. The official
was exceedingly polite, and, after some delay, the two porters whom
Burnley and Lefarge had interviewed some weeks before were ushered
into the room. La Touche questioned them minutely, but without
gaining any fresh information. They repeated their statement that
they would recognise the carter who had brought the cask were they to
see him again, but were unable to describe him more particularly than
before.

La Touche then went to the Gare du Nord. He was fortunate in finding
the clerk who had handed over the cask to the black-bearded Jacques
de Belleville. But again he was disappointed. Neither the clerk nor
any of the other officials he interviewed recollected the carter who
had taken the cask, and none therefore could say if he was like the
man who delivered it at the Goods Station.

Baffled on this point, La Touche turned into a café, and, ordering a
bock, sat down to consider his next step. Apparently Lefarge had been
right to advertise. He recollected from the report he had had from
the authorities that all the advertisements had appeared in, among
other papers, _Le Journal_. He determined he would see those
advertisements in the hope of discovering why they had failed.

He accordingly drove to the office of the paper and asked leave to
look over the files. A slight research convinced him that the
advertising had been thoroughly and skilfully done. He took copies of
each fresh announcement--there were nearly a dozen. Then, returning
to his hotel, he lay down on his bed and looked them over again.

The paragraphs varied in wording, type, and position in the columns,
but necessarily they were similar in effect. All asked for
information as to the identity of a carter who, about six o’clock on
Thursday, the 1st of April, had delivered a cask at the rue Cardinet
Goods Station. All offered a reward varying from 1000 to 5000 francs,
and all undertook that the carter would not suffer from the
information being divulged.

After a couple of hours hard thinking La Touche came to the
conclusion that the advertising had been complete. He saw no way in
which he could improve on what Lefarge had done, nor could he think
of anything in the announcements themselves which might have
militated against their success.

To clear his brain he determined to banish all thoughts of the case
for the remainder of the day. He therefore went for a stroll along
the boulevards, and, after a leisurely dinner, turned his steps
towards the Folies Bergères, and there passed the evening.

On his way home it occurred to him that while waiting to interview M.
Dufresne at the office of the Pump Construction Company he might run
over to Brussels and satisfy himself as to that part of Boirac’s
alibi. Accordingly, next morning saw him entrained for the Belgian
capital, where he arrived about midday. He drove to the Hôtel
Maximilian, lunched, and afterward made exhaustive inquiries at the
office. Here he saw copies of the visitors’ returns which every
Belgian hotel must furnish to the police, and satisfied himself
absolutely that Boirac had been there on the date in question. As a
result of Lefarge’s inquiries the clerk recollected the circumstances
of the pump manufacturer’s telephone, and adhered to his previous
statement in every particular. La Touche took the afternoon train for
Paris considerably disappointed with the results of his journey.

On the chance that the chief clerk might be back at work, he returned
next day to the pump works. Again he watched till Boirac had left and
again entered and asked for M. Dufresne. The same prompt clerk came
forward to speak to him, and, saying that M. Dufresne had returned
that morning, once more asked him to be seated while he took in his
card. La Touche then suddenly remembered the girl he had so much
admired, but whose existence he had forgotten since his last visit.
He glanced across the room. She was there, but he could not see her
face. Something had evidently gone wrong with the splendid-looking
machine which she--La Touche whimsically wondered why you did not say
‘played’ or ‘drove’--and she was bending over it, apparently
adjusting some screw. But he had no time to pursue his studies of
female beauty. The prompt clerk was back at his side almost
immediately to say that M. Dufresne could see him. He accordingly
followed his guide to the chief clerk’s room.

M. Dufresne was quite as ready to assist him as had been his other
informants, but he could tell him nothing the detective did not
already know. He repeated his statement to Lefarge almost word for
word. He was sure M. Boirac had telephoned about 2.30 on the
Tuesday--he unmistakably recognised his voice, and he was equally
certain of the date.

La Touche regained the street and walked slowly back to his hotel. It
was beginning to look very much as if the alibi could not be broken,
and he was unable for the moment to see his next step in the matter.
Nor had any information resulted from the labours of Mallet and
Farol, the two men he had brought over to shadow Boirac. Up to the
present the latter had been most circumspect, not having been
anywhere or done anything in the slightest degree suspicious. As La
Touche wrote a detailed report of his proceedings to Clifford, he
felt for the first time a distinct doubt as to the outcome of his
investigations.




CHAPTER XXVI

A CLUE AT LAST

La Touche, having finished his report, put on his hat and sallied
forth into the rue de la Fayette. He intended after posting his
letter to cross to the south side and spend the evening with some
friends. He was not in an agreeable frame of mind. The conclusion to
which he was apparently being forced would be a disappointment to
Clifford, and, if the theory of Boirac’s guilt broke down, he saw no
better than the solicitor what defence remained.

He sauntered slowly along the pavement, his mind brooding almost
subconsciously on the case. Then, noticing a letter-box on the
opposite side of the street, he turned to cross over. But as he
stepped off the sidewalk an idea flashed into his mind and he stopped
as if shot. That typewriter the pretty girl in Boirac’s office had
been using was _a new machine_. La Touche was an observant man, and
he had noted the fact, as he habitually noted small details about the
objects he saw. But not until this moment did he realise the
tremendously suggestive deduction which might be made from the fact.
Lefarge, in his search for the machine on which the Le Gautier letter
had been typed, had obtained samples from all the typewriters to
which Boirac, so far as he could ascertain, had access. But what if
that new machine replaced an old? What if that old machine had typed
the Le Gautier letter and had been then got rid of so that samples
taken by suspicious detective might be supplied from some other
typewriter? Here was food for thought. If he could prove anything of
this kind he need have no fear of disappointing his employer. He put
the report back in his pocket till he could adjust himself to this
new point of view.

And then he had a revulsion of feeling. After all, offices must
necessarily procure new typewriters, and there was no reason in this
case to suppose a machine had been purchased otherwise than in the
ordinary course of business. And yet--the idea was attractive.

He decided he might as well make some inquiries before forwarding his
report. It would be a simple matter to find out when the new machine
was purchased, and, if the date was not suspicious, the matter could
be dropped.

He considered the best way of ascertaining his information. His first
idea was to meet the typist and ask her the direct question. Then he
saw that if her answer supported his theory, not only would further
inquiries be necessary, but no hint that these were being made must
reach Boirac. It might therefore be better to try diplomacy.

To La Touche diplomatic dealing was second nature, and he was not
long in devising a plan. He looked at his watch. It was 5.15. If he
hurried he might reach the pump works before the pretty typist left.

From the window of the café which had so often served in a similar
capacity, he watched the office staff take their departure. For a
long time his victim did not appear, and he had almost come to the
conclusion she must have gone, when he saw her. She was with two
other girls, and the three, after glancing round the street, tripped
off daintily citywards.

When they had gone a fair distance La Touche followed. The girls
stood for a moment at the Simplon Station of the Metro, then the
pretty typist vanished down the steps, while the others moved on
along he pavement. La Touche sprinted to the entrance and was in time
to see the gray dress of the quarry disappearing down the passage
labelled Porte d’Orléans. He got his ticket and followed to the
platform. There was a fairly dense crowd, and, after locating
mademoiselle he mingled with it, keeping well back out of sight.

A train soon drew up and the girl got in. La Touche entered the next
carriage. Standing at the end of his vehicle he could see her through
the glass between the coaches without, he felt sure, being himself
visible. One, two, five stations passed, and then she got up and
moved towards the door ready to alight. La Touche did the same,
observing from the map in the carriage that the next station was not
a junction. As the train jerked and groaned to a standstill he leaped
out and hurried to the street. Crossing rapidly, he stopped at a
kiosk and asked for an evening paper. Bending over the counter of the
stall, he saw her emerge up the steps and start off down the street.
He remained on the opposite side, cautiously following until, after
about two blocks, she entered a small, unpretentious restaurant.

‘If she is going to dine alone,’ thought La Touche, ‘I am in luck.’

He waited till she would have probably reached her second or third
course and then entered the building.

The room was narrow, corresponding to the frontage, but stretched a
long way back, the far end being lighted with electric lamps. A row
of marble-topped tables stretched down each side, with six cane
chairs at each. Mirrors framed in dingy white and gold lined the
walls. At the extreme back was a tiny stage on which an orchestra of
three girls was performing.

The place was about half full. As La Touche’s quick eye took in the
scene, he noticed the typist seated alone at a table three or four
from the stage. He walked forward.

‘If mademoiselle permits?’ he murmured, bowing, but hardly looking at
her, as he pulled out a chair nearly opposite her and sat down.

He gave his order and then, business being as it were off his mind,
he relaxed so far as to look around. He glanced at the girl, seemed
suddenly to recognise her, gave a mild start of surprise and leant
forward with another bow.

‘Mademoiselle will perhaps pardon if I presume,’ he said, in his best
manner, ‘but I think we have met before or, if not quite, almost.’

The girl raised her eyebrows but did not speak.

‘In the office of M. Boirac,’ went on the detective. ‘You would not,
of course, notice, but I saw you there busy with a fine typewriter.’

Mademoiselle was not encouraging. She shrugged her shoulders, but
made no reply. La Touche had another shot.

‘I am perhaps impertinent in addressing mademoiselle, but I assure
her no impertinence is meant. I am the inventor of a new device for
typewriters, and I try to get opinion of every expert operator I can
find on its utility. Perhaps mademoiselle would permit me to describe
it and ask hers?’

‘Why don’t you take it to some of the agents?’ She spoke frigidly.

‘Because, mademoiselle,’ answered La Touche, warming to his subject,
‘I am not quite certain if the device would be sufficiently valuable.
It would be costly to attach and no firm would buy unless it could be
shown that operators wanted it. That is what I am so anxious to
learn.’

She was listening, though not very graciously. La Touche did not wait
for a reply, but began sketching on the back of the menu.

‘Here,’ he said, ‘is my idea,’ and he proceeded to draw and describe
the latest form of tabulator with which he was acquainted. The girl
look at him with scorn and suspicion.

‘You’re describing the Remington tabulator,’ she said coldly.

‘Oh, but, pardon me, mademoiselle. You surely don’t mean that? I have
been told this is quite new.’

‘You have been told wrongly. I ought to know, for I have been using
one the very same, as what you say is yours, for several weeks.’

‘You don’t say so, mademoiselle? That means that I have been
forestalled and all my work has been wasted.’

La Touche’s disappointment was so obvious that the girl thawed
slightly.

‘You’d better call at the Remington depot and ask to see one of their
new machines. Then you can compare their tabulator with yours.’

‘Thank you, mademoiselle, I’ll do so to-morrow. Then you use a
Remington?’

‘Yes, a No. 10.’

‘Is that an old machine? Pardon my questions, but have you had it
long?’

‘I can’t tell you how long it has been at the office. I am only there
myself six or seven weeks.’

Six or seven weeks! And the murder took place just over six weeks
before! Could there be a connection, or was this mere coincidence?

‘It must be a satisfaction to a man of business,’ La Touche went on
conversationally, as he helped himself to wine, ‘when his business
grows to the extent of requiring an additional typist. I envy M.
Boirac his feelings when he inserted his advertisement nearly as much
as I envy him when you applied.’

‘You have wasted your envy then,’ returned the girl in chilly and
contemptuous tones, ‘for you are wrong on both points. M. Boirac’s
business has not extended, for I replaced a girl who had just left,
and no advertisement was inserted as I went to M. Boirac from the
Michelin School in the rue Scribe.’

La Touche had got his information; at least, all he had expected from
this girl. He continued the somewhat one-sided conversation for some
minutes, and then with a courteous bow left the restaurant. He
reached his hotel determined to follow the matter up.

Accordingly, next morning saw him repeating his tactics of the
previous evening. Taking up his position in the restaurant near the
Pump Works shortly before midday, he watched the staff go for
_déjeuner_. First came M. Boirac, then M. Dufresne, and then a crowd
of lesser lights--clerks and typists. He saw his friend of the night
before with the same two companions, closely followed by the prompt
clerk. At last the stream ceased, and in about ten minutes the
detective crossed the road and once more entered the office. It was
empty except for a junior clerk.

‘Good-morning,’ said La Touche affably. ‘I called to ask whether you
would be so good as to do me a favour. I want a piece of information
for which, as it may give you some trouble to procure, I will pay
twenty francs. Will you help me?’

‘What is the information, monsieur?’ asked the boy--he was little
more than a boy.

‘I am manager of a paper works and I am looking for a typist for my
office. I am told that a young lady typist left here about six weeks
ago?’

‘That is true, monsieur; Mlle. Lambert.’

‘Yes, that is the lady’s name,’ returned La Touche, making a mental
note of it.

‘Now,’ he continued confidentially, ‘can you tell me why she left?’

‘I think she was dismissed, monsieur, but I never really understood
why.’

‘Dismissed?’

‘Yes, monsieur. She had some row with M. Boirac, our managing
director. I don’t know--none of us know--what it was about.’

‘I had heard she was dismissed, and that is why I was interested in
her. Unfortunately my business is not for the moment as flourishing
as I should wish. It occurred to me that if I could find a typist who
had some blot on her record, she might be willing to come to me for a
smaller salary than she would otherwise expect. It would benefit her
as well as me, as it would enable her to regain her position.’

The clerk bowed without comment, and La Touche continued:--

‘The information I want is this. Can you put me in touch with this
young lady? Do you know her address?’

The other shook his head.

‘I fear not, monsieur. I don’t know where she lives.’

La Touche affected to consider.

‘Now, how am I to get hold of her?’ he said. The clerk making no
suggestion, he went on after a pause:--

‘I think if you could tell me just when she left it might help me.
Could you do that?’

‘About six weeks ago. I can tell you the exact day by looking up the
old wages sheets if you don’t mind waiting. Will you take a seat?’

La Touche thanked him and sat down, trusting the search would be
concluded before any of the other clerks returned. But he was not
delayed long. In three or four minutes the boy returned.

‘She left on Monday, the 5th of April, monsieur.’

‘And was she long with you?’

‘About two years, monsieur.’

‘I am greatly obliged. And her Christian name was?’

‘Éloise, monsieur. Éloise Lambert.’

‘A thousand thanks. And now I have just to beg of you not to mention
my visit, as it would injure me if it got out that my business was
not too flourishing. Here is my debt to you.’ He handed over the
twenty francs.

‘It is too much, monsieur. I am glad to oblige you without payment.’

‘A bargain is a bargain,’ insisted the detective, and, followed by
the profuse thanks of the young clerk, he left the office.

‘This grows interesting,’ thought La Touche, as he once more emerged
into the street. ‘Boirac dismisses a typist on the very day the cask
reaches St. Katherine’s Docks. Now, I wonder if the new typewriter
made its appearance at the same time. I must get hold of that girl
Lambert.’

But how was this to be done? No doubt there would be a record of her
address somewhere in the office, but he was anxious that no idea of
his suspicions should leak out, and he preferred to leave that source
untapped. What, then, was left to him? He could see nothing for it
but an advertisement.

Accordingly, he turned into a café and, calling for a bock, drafted
out the following:--

‘If Mlle. Éloise Lambert, stenographer and typist, will apply to M.
Georges La Touche, Hôtel Suisse, rue de La Fayette, she will hear
something to her advantage.’

He read ever the words and then a thought struck him, and he took
another sheet of paper and wrote:--

‘If Mlle. Éloise Lambert, stenographer and typist, will apply to M.
Guillaume Faneuil, Hôtel St. Antoine, she will hear something to her
advantage.’

‘If Boirac should see the thing, there’s no use in my shoving into
the limelight,’ he said to himself. ‘I’ll drop Georges La Touche for
a day or two and try the St. Antoine.’

He sent his advertisement to several papers, then, going to the Hôtel
St. Antoine, engaged a room in the name of M. Guillaume Faneuil.

‘I shall not require it till to-morrow,’ he said to the clerk, and
next day he moved in.

During the morning there was a knock at the door of his private
sitting-room, and a tall, graceful girl of about five-and-twenty
entered. She was not exactly pretty, but exceedingly pleasant and
good-humoured looking. Her tasteful, though quiet, dress showed she
was not in need as a result of losing her situation.

La Touche rose and bowed.

‘Mlle. Lambert?’ he said with a smile. ‘I am M. Faneuil. Won’t you
sit down?’

‘I saw your advertisement in _Le Soir_, monsieur, and--here I am.’

‘I am much indebted to you for coming so promptly, mademoiselle,’
said La Touche, reseating himself, ‘and I shall not trespass long on
your time. But before explaining the matter may I ask if you are the
Mlle. Lambert who recently acted as typist at the Avrotte Works?’

‘Yes, monsieur. I was there for nearly two years.’

‘Forgive me, but can you give any proof of that? A mere matter of
form, of course, but in justice to my employers I am bound to ask the
question.’

An expression of surprise passed over the girl’s face.

‘I really don’t know that I can,’ she answered. ‘You see, I was not
expecting to be asked such a question.’

It had occurred to La Touche that in spite of his precautions Boirac
might have somehow discovered what he was engaged on, and sent this
girl with a made up story. But her answer satisfied him. If she had
been an impostor she would have come provided with proofs of her
identity.

‘Ah, well,’ he rejoined with a smile, ‘I think I may safely take the
risk. May I ask you another question? Was a new typewriter purchased
while you were at the office?’

The surprise on the pleasant face deepened.

‘Why, yes, monsieur, a No. 10 Remington.’

‘And can you tell me just when?’

‘Easily. I left the office on Monday, 5th April, and the new machine
was sent three days earlier--on Friday, the 2nd.’

Here was news indeed! La Touche was now in no doubt about following
up the matter. He must get all the information possible out of this
girl. And the need for secrecy would make him stick to diplomacy.

He smiled and bowed.

‘You will forgive me, mademoiselle, but I had to satisfy myself you
were the lady I wished to meet. I asked you these questions only to
ensure that you knew the answers. And now I shall tell you who I am
and what is the business at issue. But first, may I ask you to keep
all I may tell you secret?’

His visitor looked more and more mystified as she replied:--

‘I promise, monsieur.’

‘Then I may say that I am a private detective, employed on behalf of
the typewriter company to investigate some very extraordinary--I can
only call them frauds, which have recently been taking place. In some
way, which up to the present we have been unable to fathom, several
of our machines have developed faults which, you understand, do not
prevent them working, but which prevent them being quite
satisfactory. The altering of tensions and the slight twisting of
type to put them out of alignment are the kind of things I mean. We
hardly like to suspect rival firms of practising these frauds to get
our machines into disfavour, and yet it is hard to account for it
otherwise. Now, we think that you can possibly give us some
information, and I am authorised by my company to hand you one
hundred francs if you will be kind enough to do so.’

The surprise had not left the girl’s face as she answered:--

‘I should have been very pleased, monsieur, to tell you all I knew
without any payment, had I known anything to tell. But I am afraid I
don’t.’

‘I think, mademoiselle, you can help us if you will. May I ask you a
few questions?’

‘Certainly.’

‘The first is, can you describe the machine you used prior to the
purchase of the new one?’

‘Yes, it was a No. 7 Remington.’

‘I did not mean that,’ answered La Touche, eagerly noting this
information, ‘I knew that, of course, as it is this No. 7 machine I
am inquiring about. What I meant to ask was, had it any special marks
or peculiarities by which it could be distinguished from other No.
7’s?’

‘Why, no, I don’t think so,’ the girl answered thoughtfully. ‘And yet
there were. The letter S on the S-key had got twisted round to the
right and there were three scratches here’--she indicated the side
plate of an imaginary typewriter.

‘You would then be able to identify the machine if you saw it again?’

‘Yes, I certainly should.’

‘Now, mademoiselle, had it any other peculiarities--defective letters
or alignment or anything of that kind?’

‘No, nothing really bad. It was old and out of date, but quite good
enough. M. Boirac, of course, thought otherwise, but I maintain my
opinion.’

‘What did M. Boirac say exactly?’

‘He blamed me for it. But there wasn’t anything wrong, and if there
had been it wasn’t my fault.’

‘I am sure of that, mademoiselle. But perhaps you would tell me about
it from the beginning?’

‘There’s not much to tell. I had a big job to do--typing a long
specification of a pumping plant for the Argentine, and when I had
finished I left it as usual on M. Boirac’s desk. A few minutes later
he sent for me and asked how I came to put such an untidy document
before him. I didn’t see anything wrong with it and I asked him what
he complained of. He pointed out some very small defects--principally
uneven alignment, and one or two letters just a trifle blurred. You
really would hardly have seen it. I said that wasn’t my fault, and
that the machine wanted adjustment. He said I had been striking while
the shift key was partly moved, but, M. Faneuil, I had been doing
nothing of the kind. I told M. Boirac so, and he then apologised and
said I must have a new machine. He telephoned there and then to the
Remington people, and a No. 10 came that afternoon.’

‘And what happened to the old No. 7?’

‘The man that brought the new one took the old away.’

‘And was that all that was said?’

‘That was all, monsieur.’

‘But, pardon me, I understood you left owing to some misunderstanding
with M. Boirac?’

The girl shook her head.

‘Oh, no,’ she said, ‘nothing of the sort. M. Boirac told me the
following Monday, that is, two days after the typewriter business,
that he was reorganising his office and would do with a typist less.
As I was the last arrival, I had to go. He said he wished to carry
out the alterations immediately so that I might leave at once. He
gave me a month’s salary instead of notice, and a good testimonial
which I have here. We parted quite friends.’

The document read:--


‘I have pleasure in certifying that Mlle. Éloise Lambert was engaged
as a stenographer and typist in the head office of this company from
August, 1910, till 5th April, 1912, during which time she gave every
satisfaction to me and my chief clerk. She proved herself diligent
and painstaking, thoroughly competent in her work, and of excellent
manners and conduct. She leaves the firm through no fault of her own,
but because we are reducing staff. I regret her loss and have every
confidence in recommending her to those needing her services.

               ‘(Signed) RAOUL BOIRAC, _Managing Director_.’


‘An excellent testimonial, mademoiselle,’ La Touche commented. ‘Pray
excuse me for just a moment.’

He stepped into the adjoining bedroom and closed the door. Then
taking a sample of Boirac’s writing from his pocket-book, he compared
the signature with that of the testimonial. After a careful scrutiny
he was satisfied the latter was genuine. He returned to the girl and
handed her the document.

‘Thank you, mademoiselle. Now, can you recall one other point? Did
you, within the last three or four weeks, type a letter about some
rather unusual matters--about some one winning a lot of money in the
State Lottery and about sending this packed in a cask to England?’

‘Never, monsieur,’ asserted the typist, evidently completely puzzled
by the questions she was being asked. La Touche watched her keenly
and was satisfied she had no suspicion that his business was other
than he had said. But he was nothing if not thorough, and his
thoroughness drove him to make provision for suspicions which might
arise later. He therefore went on to question her about the No. 7
machine, asking whether she had ever noticed it had been tampered
with, and finally saying that he believed there must have been a
mistake and that the machine they had discussed was not that in which
he was interested. Then, after obtaining her address, he handed her
the hundred francs, which, after a protest, she finally accepted.

‘Now, not a word to any one, if you please, mademoiselle,’ he
concluded, as they parted.

His discoveries, to say the least of it, were becoming interesting.
If Mlle. Lambert’s story was true--and he was strongly disposed to
believe her--M. Boirac had acted in a way that required some
explanation. His finding fault with the typist did not seem genuine.
In fact, to La Touche it looked as if the whole episode had been
arranged to provide an excuse for getting rid of the typewriter.
Again, the manufacturer’s dismissal of his typist at a day’s notice
was not explained by his statement that he was about to reorganise
his office. Had that been true he would have allowed her to work her
month’s notice, and, even more obviously, he would not have
immediately engaged her successor. As La Touche paid his bill at the
hotel he decided that though there might be nothing in his
suspicions, the matter was well worth further investigation. He
therefore called a taxi and was driven to the Remington typewriter
depot.

‘I want,’ he said to the salesman who came forward, ‘to buy a
second-hand machine. Can you let me see some?’

‘Certainly, monsieur. Will you step this way?’

They went to a room at the back of the building where were stored a
vast assemblage of typewriters of all sizes and in all states of
repair. La Touche, inquiring as to prices and models, moved slowly
about, running his quick eye over the machines, looking always for
one with a twisted S-key. But, search as he would, he could not find
what he wanted. Nor could he find any No. 7’s. These machines were
all more modern.

He turned at last to the shopman.

‘These are all rather expensive for me. I should explain that I am
the principal of a commercial school, and I merely want a machine on
which beginners could learn the keys. Any old thing would do, if I
could get it cheap. Have you any older machines?’

‘Certainly, monsieur, we have several quite good No. 7’s and a few
No. 5’s. Come this way, please.’

They went to a room devoted to more antiquated specimens. Here La
Touche continued his investigations, searching always for the twisted
S.

At last he saw it. Not only was the letter turned to the right, but
on the side plate were the three scratches mentioned by Mlle. Lambert.

‘I think that one would suit,’ he said. ‘Could you get it down and
let me have a look at it?’

He went through the pretence of examining it with care.

‘Yes,’ he said, ‘this will do if it works all right. I should like to
try it.’

He put in a sheet of paper and typed a few words. Then, drawing out
his work, he examined the letters and alignment.

As he looked at it even his long experience scarcely prevented him
giving a cry of triumph. For, to the best of his belief, this was the
machine on which the Le Gautier letter had been typed!

He turned again to the shopman.

‘That seems all right,’ he said. ‘I’ll take the machine, please.’

He paid for it and obtained a receipt. Then he asked to see the
manager.

‘I’m going to ask you, monsieur,’ he said, when he had drawn that
gentleman aside, ‘to do me a rather unusual favour. I have just
bought this machine, and I want you to see it before I take it away,
and, if you will be so kind, to give me some information about it. I
shall tell you in confidence why I ask. I am a detective, employed on
behalf of a man charged with a serious crime, but who I believe is
innocent. A certain letter, on the authorship of which his guilt
largely depends, was written, if I am not mistaken, on this machine.
You will forgive me if I do not go into all the particulars. An
adequate identification of the typewriter is obviously essential. I
would therefore ask you if you would be kind enough to put a private
mark on it. Also, if you would tell me how it came into your
possession, I should be more than obliged.’

‘I shall do what you ask with pleasure, monsieur,’ returned the
manager, ‘but I trust I shall not be required to give evidence.’

‘I do not think so, monsieur. I feel sure the identity of the machine
will not be questioned. I make my request simply as a matter of
precaution.’

The manager, with a small centre punch, put a few ‘spots’ on the main
frame, noting the machine’s number at the same time.

‘Now you want to know where we got it,’ he went on to La Touche.
‘Excuse me a moment.’

He disappeared to his office, returning in a few minutes with a slip
of paper in his hand.

‘The machine was received from the Avrotte Pump Construction
office’--he referred to the paper--‘on 2nd April last. It was
supplied to the firm several years earlier, and on the date mentioned
they exchanged it for a more up-to-date machine, a No. 10.’

‘I am extremely obliged, monsieur. You may trust me to keep you out
of the business if at all possible.’

Calling a taxi, La Touche took the machine to his hotel in the rue de
La Fayette. There he typed another sample, and, using a powerful
lens, compared the letters with the photographic enlargements he had
obtained of the Le Gautier type. He was satisfied. The machine before
him was that for which he had been in search.

He was delighted at his success. The more he thought of it, the more
certain he felt that Boirac’s fault-finding was merely an excuse to
get rid of the typewriter. And the manufacturer had dismissed Mlle.
Lambert simply because she knew too much. If inquiries were made in
the office, he would be safer with her out of the way.

And as to Boirac’s deeper object. So far as the detective could see,
there could be only one explanation. Boirac knew the Le Gautier
letter was done on that machine. And if he knew, did it not follow
that he had sent the letter to Felix? And if he had sent the letter,
must he not be guilty? To La Touche it began to look like it.

Then a further point struck him. If Boirac were guilty, what about
the alibi? The alibi seemed so conclusive. And yet, if he were
innocent, what about the typewriter? There seemed to be no escape
from the dilemma, and La Touche was horribly puzzled.

But as he thought over the matter he began to see that the discovery
of the typewriter did not so greatly help his client after all.
Though at first sight it had seemed to indicate Boirac’s guilt,
second thoughts showed him that the manufacturer could make a very
good case for himself. He could stick to the story told by Mlle.
Lambert--that the type was in point of fact not good enough for his
work. He could say plausibly enough that for some time he had wanted
a machine with a tabulator, and that the bad alignment had only
brought the matter to a head. Then, with regard to the typist. Though
the girl seemed quiet and truthful, goodness only knew what she might
not be holding back. On her own showing she had had exchanges of
opinion with her employer, and she might have been very impertinent.
At all events, Boirac could give his own version of what took place
and no one would know the truth. Further, he could account for his
testimonial by saying that while he disliked the girl and wished to
be rid of her, he did not want to injure her permanently. He might
even admit falsely telling the girl he was going to reorganise his
office in order to smooth over her leaving.

With regard to the Le Gautier letter, Boirac could simply deny
knowledge, and La Touche did not see how he could be contradicted. It
could even be argued that Felix might have bribed a clerk to copy the
letter for him on that machine so as to throw suspicion on Boirac. If
Felix were guilty, it would be a likely enough move.

At last La Touche came to the definite conclusion that he had not
enough evidence either to convict Boirac or clear Felix. He _must_ do
better. He _must_ break the alibi and find the carter.




CHAPTER XXVII

LA TOUCHE’S DILEMMA

That night La Touche could not sleep. The atmosphere was sultry and
tense. Great masses of blue-black clouds climbing the south-western
sky seemed to promise a storm. The detective tossed from side to
side, his body restless, his mind intently awake and active. And then
an idea suddenly occurred to him.

He had been mentally reviewing the wording of the various
advertisements Lefarge had inserted for the carter. These, he
recollected, were all to the effect that a reward would be paid for
information as to the identity of the carter who had delivered the
cask at the rue Cardinet goods station. Who, he thought, in the
nature of things could answer that? Only, so far as he could see, two
people--the carter himself and the man who engaged him. No one else
would know anything about the matter. Of these, obviously the latter
was not going to give the affair away. Nor would the carter if the
other paid him well or had some hold over him. This, thought La
Touche, may be why these advertisements have all failed.

So far he had got when his illuminating idea struck him. The fault of
these advertisements was that they had appealed to the wrong people.
Instead of appealing to the carter, could his associates not be
approached? Or rather his employer, for it was obvious that neither
Boirac nor Felix could be his employer, except in the case of this
one job. He jumped out of bed, turned on the light, and began to
draft a circular letter.


‘DEAR SIR,’ he wrote, ‘An innocent man is in danger of conviction on
a murder charge for want of certain evidence. This could be supplied
by a carter--a clean-shaven, sharp-featured man with white hair. If
you have (or had last March) such a man in your employment, or know
of such, I most earnestly beg you to advise me. I am a private
detective, working on behalf of the accused man. I guarantee no harm
to the carter. On the contrary, I am willing to pay all men who
answer the description five francs if they will call on me here any
evening between 8.00 and 10.00, as well as 500 francs to the man who
can give me the information I require.’


Repeating the manœuvre he had employed in the case of the
advertisement for Mlle. Lambert, La Touche did not add his own name
and address. He signed the note Charles Epée, and headed it Hôtel
d’Arles, rue de Lyon.

Next morning he took his draft to a manufactory of office supplies
and arranged for copies to be made and posted to the managers of all
the carting establishments in Paris, the envelopes being marked
‘confidential.’ Then he went on to the rue de Lyon, and, in the name
of Charles Epée, engaged a room at the Hôtel d’Arles.

Taking the Metro at the Place de la Bastille, he returned to the
goods station in the rue Cardinet. There, after a considerable delay,
he found his two friends, the porters who had unloaded the cask on
that Thursday nearly two months before. Explaining that he expected
the carter he was in search of to call at his hotel on some evening
in the early future, he offered them five francs a day to sit in his
room between 8.00 and 10.00 p.m. to identify the man, should he
arrive. To this the porters willingly agreed. That evening they had
their first meeting, but without success. No clean-shaven,
white-haired, sharp-featured carters turned up.

When La Touche returned to his rue de La Fayette hotel he found a
letter from Clifford. The police had made two discoveries. The first
La Touche had realised they were bound to make sooner or later. They
had learnt of Felix’s identity with the art school student who had
been in love with the late Mme. Boirac, and of the short-lived
engagement between the two. All the assistance which these facts gave
the prosecution was therefore now at the disposal of the authorities.

The second piece of information was that Inspector Burnley had found
the carter who had taken the cask from Waterloo on the Wednesday
morning of the fateful week and delivered it at Charing Cross next
morning, for, it seemed, both these jobs had been done by the same
man.

It appeared that about 7.30 on the Tuesday evening of that week a
dark, foreign-looking man with a pointed black beard had called at
the office of Messrs. Johnson, the large carting agents in Waterloo
Road, and had hired a dray and man for the two following days, as
well as the use of an empty shed for the same period. He had
instructed the carter to meet him at Waterloo Station at 10.00 next
morning, Wednesday. There, on the arrival of the Southampton boat
train, he had claimed the cask and had it loaded up on the dray, as
was already known. The vehicle had been taken to the shed, where it
had been left, the horse having been sent back to the stable. The
black-bearded man had told the driver he might take the remainder of
the day as a holiday, but that he wanted him to return on the
following morning, Thursday, take the cask to Charing Cross, and
there book it to Paris. He had handed him the amount of the freight
as well as ten shillings for himself. Upon the man asking where in
Paris the cask was to be sent, the other had told him he would leave
it properly addressed. This he had done, for next morning the cask
had a new label, bearing the name of Jaques de Belleville, Cloakroom,
Gare du Nord. The carter had then left the black-bearded man in the
shed with the cart and cask. Next morning he had booked the latter to
Paris.

Asked if he could identify the black-bearded man, the carter said he
believed he could. But he failed to do so. On being taken to see
Felix, he stated the artist was like the dark foreigner, but he would
not swear he was the same man.

This news interested La Touche greatly, and he sat smoking into the
small hours seeing how far he could work these new facts into the
theories of the crime which he and Clifford had discussed. If the
prosecution were correct, Felix must have been the man who called at
the cartage establishment at 7.30 on Tuesday evening. He would
therefore have had undisputed possession of the cask from about 11.00
a.m. on the Wednesday until, say 7.00 on the following morning, and
there were two obvious ways in which he could have put in the body.
Either he could have procured another horse and taken the cask to St.
Malo, where, in the privacy of the walled yard, he could have removed
the statue and substituted the body, returning the cask to the shed
by the same means, or he could have hidden the body in his two-seater
and run it to the shed, making the exchange there. Unfortunately, La
Touche saw, the facts he had just learnt would fit in only too well
with the theory of Felix’s guilt.

On the other hand they supplied another period for which an alibi
might be found for the artist--7.30 on the Tuesday night. But,
remembering his own and Clifford’s researches into the manner in
which Felix spent that week, La Touche was not hopeful of help here.

The detective then turned his thoughts to Clifford’s theory of
Boirac’s guilt. And immediately he saw how the news crystallised the
issue of the alibi. Up to the present the alibi had been considered
as a whole, the portions which had been tested and those which had
not, alike included. Generally speaking, it had been argued that if
Boirac were in Paris and in Belgium during the fateful days, he could
not have been in London. But now here was a direct issue between
definite hours. At 7.30 on the Tuesday evening the bearded man was at
Johnson’s in the Waterloo Road. At 2.30 that same day Boirac was at
Charenton. La Touche looked up his Continental Bradshaw. A train
arrived at Victoria at 7.10, which would just enable a traveller from
Paris to reach the carting contractor’s at the hour named. But that
train left Paris at 12.00 noon. Therefore it was utterly and
absolutely out of the question that Boirac could be the man. But then
there was the typewriter. . . .

La Touche was back on the horns of the old dilemma. If Boirac was
guilty, how did he work the alibi? if innocent, why did he get rid of
the typewriter? He almost writhed in his exasperation. But it only
made him more determined than ever to reach a solution, cost him what
it might of labour and trouble.

The next evening he set off to the Hôtel d’Arles in the rue de Lyon,
to await with the goods yard porters the coming of sharp-featured
carters with white hair.

A number of replies to his circular had come in. Some were merely
negative, the recipients having written to say that no carter
answering to the description was known to them. Others stated they
knew men of the type required, mentioning names and addresses. La
Touche made lists of these, determining to call on any who did not
come to see him at the hotel.

While he was engaged in this work his first visitor was announced.
This man was clean-shaven and white-haired, but the sharpness of his
features was not much in evidence. The porters immediately gave the
prearranged sign that this was not the man, and La Touche, handing
him his five francs, bowed him out, at the same time noting him
‘Seen’ on his list.

After he left came another and another, till before ten o’clock they
had interviewed no less than fourteen men. All these more or less
completely answered the description, but all the porters instantly
negatived. The following evening eleven men called and the next four,
with the same result.

On the third day there was another letter from Clifford. The lawyer
wrote that he had been greatly struck by the intelligence of the
carter who had carried about the cask in London. Surprised at so
superior a man holding such a position, he had brought him to his
house in the hope of learning his history. And there he had made a
discovery of the highest importance, and which, he thought, would
lead them direct to the end of their quest. The carter, John Hill,
had been quite ready to tell his story, which was as follows: Until
four years previously Hill had been a constable in the Metropolitan
police. He had a good record, and, he had believed, a future. Then he
had had an unfortunate difference with his superior officer. Hill did
not give the particulars, but Clifford understood it was a private
matter and concerned a girl. But it led to a row during hours of
duty, in which Hill admitted having entirely forgotten himself. He
had been dismissed, and, after a long and weary search, could find no
better job than he now held.

‘But,’ wrote Clifford, ‘it’s an ill wind, etc. This curious history
of Hill’s is the thing that will settle our case. He has been trained
in observation, and he observed something about the man with the cask
that will definitely settle his identity. When he was paying him he
noticed on the back of the first joint of his right forefinger, a
small scar as if from a burn. He says he is sure of this mark and
could swear to it. I asked him had he told the police. He said not,
that he didn’t love the police, and that he had answered what he had
been asked and nothing more. When he understood I was acting against
the police he volunteered the information, and I could see that he
would be glad to give evidence that would upset their conclusions.’

Clifford had then done the obvious thing. He had gone to inspect
Felix’s finger, and he had found there was no mark on it.

At first to La Touche this seemed the end of the case. This man’s
evidence definitely proved Felix innocent. His next business would be
to examine Boirac’s hand, and, if the mark was there, the matter was
at an end.

But as he thought over it he saw that this was indeed far from being
the fact. There was still the alibi. As long as that stood, a clever
counsel would insist on Boirac’s innocence. To a jury the thing would
be conclusive. And this ex-policeman’s evidence could be discredited.
In fact, the very thing that had enabled them to get hold of it--the
man’s dislike of the official force--would minimise its value. It
would be argued that Hill had invented the scar to upset the police
case. By itself, a jury might not accept this suggestion, but the
alibi would give it weight, in fact, would make it the only
acceptable theory.

However, the next step was clear. La Touche must see Boirac’s hand,
and, if there was a scar, Hill must see it, too.

About eleven o’clock therefore, the detective hailed a taxi with an
intelligent looking driver. Having reached the end of the rue
Championnet he dismounted, explaining to the man what he wanted him
to do. A few moments later found him once more seated in the window
of the café, his eyes fixed on the Pump Construction office across
the street. The taxi in accordance with orders, drove slowly about,
ready to pick him up if required.

About quarter to twelve, Boirac came out and began walking slowly
citywards. La Touche quietly followed, keeping at the other side of
the street, the taxi hovering close behind. Then the detective
congratulated himself on his foresight, for, on Boirac’s reaching the
end of the street, he hailed another taxi, and, getting in, was
driven rapidly off.

It was the work of a couple of seconds for La Touche to leap into his
car and to instruct his driver to follow the other vehicle.

The chase led down to the Grands Boulevards to Bellini’s in the
Avenue de l’Opera. Here Boirac entered, followed by his shadower.

The great restaurant was about three parts full, and La Touche from
the door was able to see Boirac taking his seat in one of the
windows. The detective dropped into a place close to the cash desk,
and, ordering table-d’hôte lunch, insisted on getting the bill at
once, on the grounds that his time was limited and that he might have
to leave before finishing. Then he ate a leisurely lunch, keeping an
eye on the manufacturer.

That gentleman was in no hurry, and La Touche had spent a long time
over his coffee before the other made a move. A number of people were
leaving the restaurant and there was a very short queue at the cash
desk. La Touche so arranged his departure that he was immediately
behind Boirac in this queue. As the manufacturer put down his money
La Touche saw his finger. The scar was there!

‘Here at last is certainty,’ thought the detective, as he drew back
out of the other’s sight. ‘So Boirac is the man after all! My work is
done!’

And then the annoying afterthought arose. Was his work done? Was the
proof he had got of Boirac’s guilt sufficient? There was still the
alibi. Always that alibi loomed in the background, menacing his
success.

Though La Touche had now no doubt Boirac was the man the carter saw,
he felt it would be more satisfactory if the two could be brought
together in the hope of getting direct evidence of identity. As time
was of value he called up Clifford and rapidly discussed the point.
It was agreed that, if possible, Hill should be sent to Paris by that
evening’s train. A couple of hours later there was a telegram from
the solicitor that this had been arranged.

Accordingly, next morning La Touche met the English boat train at the
Gare du Nord and welcomed a tall, dark man with a small, close-cut
moustache. As they breakfasted, the detective explained what he
wished done.

‘The difficulty is that you must see Boirac without his seeing you,’
he ended up, ‘we do not want him to know we are on his trail.’

‘I understand that, sir?’ returned Hill. ‘Have you any plan arranged
for me?’

‘Not exactly, but I thought if you were to make up with a false beard
and wear glasses he wouldn’t spot you. You could dress differently
also. Then I think you might lunch in the same restaurant and come
out behind him and see his hand when he’s paying same as I did.’

‘That would do, sir, but the worst of it is I don’t know my way about
either in Paris or in a restaurant of that class.’

‘You can’t speak any French?’

‘Not a word, sir.’

‘Then I think I had better ask my man, Mallet, to go with you. He
could keep you straight, and you needn’t talk at all.’

Hill nodded his head.

‘A good idea, sir.’

‘Come, then, and let me get you a rig-out.’

They drove to shop after shop till the ex-policeman was supplied with
new clothes from head to foot. Then they went to a theatrical
property maker, where a flowing black beard and long moustache were
fitted on. A pair of clear glass pince-nez completed the purchases.
When, an hour later, Hill stood in La Touche’s room dressed up in his
new disguise, no one who had known him before would have recognised
the ex-policeman, still less the London carter.

‘Capital, Hill,’ said La Touche. ‘Your own mother wouldn’t know you.’

The detective had sent a wire for his assistant, and Mallet was
waiting for them. La Touche introduced the two men and explained his
plans.

‘We haven’t much more than time,’ said Mallet, ‘so if you’re ready,
we’ll go on.’

In something under three hours they returned. The expedition had been
a complete success. They had gone direct to Bellini’s, preferring to
take the risk that the manufacturer did not lunch at the same place
each day, rather than that of following him again. And they were not
disappointed. Towards twelve, Boirac had entered and taken his seat
at what was probably the same table in the window. On his rising to
leave, they had repeated La Touche’s manœuvre and Hill, just behind
him when he was paying, had seen his finger. Instantly he had
identified the scar. Indeed, before seeing it he had been sure from
Boirac’s build and way of moving he was the man they sought.

In the evening, La Touche gave Hill a good dinner, paid him well, and
saw him off by the night train to London. Then he returned to his
hotel, lit a cigar, and lay down on his bed to wrestle again with the
problem of the alibi.

He now knew that the alibi was faked. Boirac, beyond question, had
been in London at 7.30 on the Tuesday evening. Therefore he could not
have been at Charenton at 2.00. That was the ever-recurring
difficulty, and he could see no way out.

He took a piece of paper and wrote down the hours at which they
definitely knew the manufacturer’s whereabouts. At 7.30 on Tuesday
evening he was in London at Johnson’s carting establishment in
Waterloo Road. From 10.00 till 11.00 next morning, Wednesday, he was
with Hill, getting the cask from Waterloo to the shed. He could not
have left London in the interval, so this meant that he must have
been in the English capital from 7.30 o’clock on Tuesday evening till
11.00 on Wednesday morning. Then he was at the Hôtel Maximilian in
Brussels at 11.00 on that same Wednesday evening. So much was certain
beyond doubt or question.

Did these hours work in? On Tuesday, frankly, they did not. What
about Wednesday? Could a man who was in London at 11.00 in the
morning be in Brussels at 11.00 the same evening? La Touche got his
Continental Bradshaw. Here it was. London depart 2.20 p.m.; Brussels
arrive 10.25 p.m. That seemed all right. A traveller arriving by that
train would reach the Hôtel Maximilian ‘about 11.00.’ Then La Touche
remembered that Boirac’s account of how he spent this day had not
been substantiated. He had told Lefarge he had gone to his brother’s
house at Malines, having forgotten that the latter was in Sweden. No
confirmation of that statement was forthcoming. Neither the caretaker
nor any one else had seen the manufacturer. La Touche was not long in
coming to the conclusion he had never been there at all. No, he had
crossed from London by the 2.20.

Then the detective recalled the telephone. A message had been sent by
Boirac from one of the cafés in the old town, asking the hotel clerk
to reserve a room. That call had been received about eight o’clock.
But at eight o’clock Boirac was not in the old town. He was on his
journey from London.

La Touche took up his Bradshaw again. Where would a traveller by the
2.20 p.m. from Charing Cross be at eight o’clock? And then like a
flash he understood. The boat arrived at Ostend at 7.30 p.m. and the
Brussels train did not leave until 8.40. He had telephoned from
Ostend!

So that was it! A simple plan, but how ingenious! And then La Touche
remembered that Lefarge had been quite unable to confirm the
statement that Boirac had dined at the café in the Boulevard Anspach,
or had been present at _Les Troyens_ in the Théâtre de la Monnaie.
No. He was on the right track at last.

The Wednesday was now accounted for, but there still remained the
terrible difficulty of the Tuesday. What about the café at Charenton?

And then La Touche got another of his inspirations. He had solved the
Wednesday telephone trick. Could that on Tuesday be explained in the
same way?

He had already noted that a traveller by the train leaving Paris at
12.00 noon and arriving at Victoria at 7.10 could just reach Waterloo
Road by 7.30. Thinking again over the point, he suddenly saw the
significance of the hour of the call at the carting establishment. It
was late. A man wishing to do business there would have gone earlier,
had he been able. But this man was not able. He had only reached the
city at 7.10.

He turned back to the telephone calls. Where, he asked himself with
growing excitement, would a passenger by the 12.00 noon from Paris be
at 2.30? And then he was dashed with disappointment. That train did
not reach Calais till 3.31 p.m., and at 2.30 it must have been
running at full speed somewhere between Abbeville and Boulogne.
Boirac could not have telephoned from the train. Therefore he could
not have travelled by it.

La Touche had hoped to find that, adopting the same manœuvre on each
day, the manufacturer had telephoned from some station _en route_,
presumably Calais. But that apparently was not so. At the same time,
the detective could not but feel he was getting near the truth.

He looked at the time table again. The train in question reached
Calais at 3.31 and the boat left at 3.45. That was a delay of 14
minutes. Would there be time, he wondered, to make two long-distance
calls in 14 minutes? Hardly, he thought. He considered what he
himself would do if confronted with Boirac’s problem.

And then suddenly he saw it. What could be more obvious than to go by
an earlier train and to break the journey at Calais? How would this
time table work?


          Paris      dep.     9.50 a.m.

          Calais     arr.     1.11 p.m.

          Calais     dep.     3.45 p.m.

          Victoria   arr.     7.10 p.m.


If Boirac had done that he would have had over two and a half hours
in Calais, which would have given him the opportunity he required. La
Touche believed he had reached the solution at last.

But Boirac had been actually seen telephoning from Charenton. For a
moment the detective’s spirits fell. But he felt he must be right so
far. Some explanation of the difficulty would occur to him.

And it did. The waiter had believed Boirac was there on _Monday_. And
he must have been! In some way he must have faked the telephoning.
There could be nothing else for it.

Another point occurred to him. Surely, he thought, the telephone
operator always mentions the name of the calling town in inter-urban
calls? If Boirac had called up his office from Calais, would not the
operator have said, ‘Calais wants you’? If so, how had the
manufacturer been able to deceive his butler and chief clerk?

This was undoubtedly a difficulty. But he put it on one side as he
began to think how this new theory could be tested.

First he would go again to the Charenton waiter and explain the
importance of settling the day on which Boirac lunched. Perhaps the
man would now be able to recall some circumstance which would make
this clear. Next he would find out from François and Dufresne whether
any phrase such as ‘Calais wants you’ had been used by the telephone
operator. This inquiry, he noted, must be made with great skill, so
as to avoid rousing Boirac’s suspicions should either man repeat the
conversation. From the telephone central at Calais, if not at Paris,
he could doubtless find if calls were made from the former town to
the latter at the hour in question, and he might also find that some
one answering to the description of Boirac had made those calls.
Finally, it might be possible at Ostend to get information about the
Brussels call.

Inquiries on these points should reveal enough to either confirm or
disprove his theory.

The next morning therefore saw La Touche again in the café at
Charenton in conversation with the waiter.

‘The point as to which day the gentleman was here has become
important,’ he explained, ‘and I shall hand you another twenty francs
if you can settle it.’

The man was evidently anxious to earn the money. He thought earnestly
for some time, but at last had to confess he could recall nothing
fixing the date.

‘Do you remember what he had to eat? Would that help you?’ asked the
detective.

The waiter shook his head after consideration.

‘Or any little matter of a clean cloth or napkin or anything of that
kind? No? Or any other person who was in at the same time, or to whom
you may have spoken on the subject?’

Again the man shook his head. Then suddenly a look of satisfaction
passed over his face.

‘But yes, monsieur,’ he said eagerly, ‘I remember now. What you have
just asked me brings it to my mind. M. Pascot lunched also when the
gentleman was here, and he noticed him and asked me if I knew who he
was. M. Pascot may be able to tell us.’

‘Who is M. Pascot?’

‘The apothecary, monsieur. From a dozen doors up the street. He comes
here sometimes when Madame goes shopping to Paris. If you like,
monsieur, I will go with you to him and we can inquire.’

‘I should be greatly obliged.’

A walk of a few yards brought them to the chemist’s shop. M. Pascot
was a large, bald-headed man, with a high colour and a consequential
manner.

‘Good-day, M. Pascot,’ the waiter greeted him deferentially. ‘This
gentleman is a friend of mine, a detective, and he is engaged on an
inquiry of much importance. You remember the man with the black beard
who was lunching in the café the last day you were in? He was sitting
at the little table in the alcove and then he began telephoning. You
remember? You asked me who he was.’

‘I remember,’ rumbled the apothecary in a deep bass voice, ‘and what
of him?’

‘My friend here wants to find out what day he was at the café, and I
thought perhaps you would be able to tell him?’

‘And how should I be able to tell him?’

‘Well, M. Pascot, you see it was on the same day that you were with
us, and I thought maybe you would be able to fix that date, the day
Madame was in Paris--you told me that.’

The pompous man seemed slightly annoyed, as if the waiter was taking
a liberty in mentioning his personal concerns before a stranger. La
Touche broke in with his smooth suavity.

‘If, M. Pascot, you could do anything to help me, I should be more
than grateful. I should explain to you that I am acting on behalf of
an innocent man,’ and he drew a pathetic picture of the evil case in
which Felix found himself, ending up by delicately insinuating that a
reward for suitable information was not out of the reckoning.

M. Pascot thawed.

‘Permit me to consult Madame, monsieur,’ he said, and with a bow he
withdrew. In a few moments he reappeared.

‘I can recollect the date now, monsieur. Madame had occasion to go to
Paris to see her solicitor on business, and a note of the date was
kept. It was Monday, the 29th of March last.’

‘I cannot say, monsieur, how obliged I am to you,’ said La Touche in
heartfelt tones, and by a sort of legerdemain, of which both
participants remained profoundly unconscious, a twenty-franc bill
passed from hand to hand. La Touche was extraordinarily pleased. He
had broken the alibi.

Leaving the apothecary and waiter bowing and smiling as a result of
their _douceurs_, La Touche turned his steps to the pier and took a
river steamer to the Pont de l’Alma. Walking up the Avenue, he rang
at Boirac’s and was soon closeted with François in his little room.

‘About that telephone message we were talking of the other day, M.
François,’ he remarked casually, when they had conversed on general
subjects for some minutes, ‘I wasn’t quite certain where you said M.
Boirac was speaking from. My first recollection was that you said
Calais; then I wondered if it was not Charenton. I have to make a
report on my proceedings and I would like to get it as correct as
possible.’

The butler looked surprised and interested.

‘It is curious, monsieur, that you should ask me that, for I don’t
remember mentioning anything about it. I also thought at first it was
Calais. I thought the operator said ‘Calais wants you,’ and I was
surprised, for I did not know M. Boirac intended to leave Paris. But
I was wrong, for when M. Boirac began to speak I asked him the direct
question. ‘You are speaking from Calais?’ I said. ‘No,’ he answered,
‘from Charenton.’ I am sure now it was my mistake and that what I
thought was Calais was really Charenton. I am not very quick and on
the telephone these names sound very much alike. Strange your making
the same mistake.’

‘It is curious,’ admitted La Touche, ‘almost like one of those
extraordinary cases of thought transference you read of. However, I
am obliged for your confirmation that it was Charenton,’ and he
diverted the conversation into other channels.

His next visit was to the Telephone Central. Here at first they were
not keen to give him any information, but on producing his card and
confidentially explaining his business to the head of the department,
he obtained what he wanted. Inquiries were made from Calais by wire,
and after a considerable delay he was informed that at 2.32 and 2.44
on the Tuesday in question calls were made on Paris. The demand came
from the public call office and were for the following numbers: Passy
386 and Nord 745. When La Touche found from the directory that these
numbers were those of M. Boirac’s house and office respectively, he
could hardly refrain from laughing aloud.

‘How, I wonder,’ he thought, ‘did Lefarge neglect so obvious a check
on the Charenton messages?’ Then it occurred to him that probably
only inter-urban calls were so noted.

The proof of his theory seemed so complete he did not think it
necessary to make inquiries at Ostend. Indeed, he believed his task
was at last accomplished, and he began to consider an immediate
return to London.




CHAPTER XXVIII

THE UNRAVELLING OF THE WEB

When La Touche solved the problem of how Boirac had faked his alibi,
his first impression was that his work was done. But, as had happened
so often before, second thoughts showed him that this was hardly the
case. Though he had established Boirac’s guilt to his own
satisfaction, he doubted if he could prove it in court, and, indeed,
the whole matter was still far from clear.

He felt that if he could only find the carter who had brought the
cask to the rue Cardinet he would reach certainty on at least some of
the points which were puzzling him. He therefore decided to
concentrate once more on this problem.

Since the sending out of his circular to the managers of the various
carting establishments in the city, he had interviewed no less than
twenty-seven more or less clean-shaven, white-haired, and
sharp-featured carters. But all to no purpose. The man he wanted was
not among them. And as answers to practically all his circulars had
been received, he had reluctantly come to the conclusion his plan had
failed.

That evening, when Mallet called to make his customary report on
Boirac’s doings, the two men discussed the matter, and it was a
remark dropped by his assistant that turned La Touche’s thoughts to a
point he had previously overlooked.

‘Why do you think he was employed by a cartage contractor?’ Mallet
had asked, and La Touche had been going to reply with some asperity
that cartage contractors were not uncommonly found to employ carters,
when the pertinence of the other’s question struck him. Why, indeed?
Of the thousands of carters in Paris, only a small proportion were
employed by cartage firms. By far the greater number worked for
specific businesses. Might not the man who brought the cask to the
goods station belong to this class, and if so, might not this account
for the failure of the original advertisements? If a carter were
bribed to use his employer’s vehicle for his own gain he would not
afterwards give the fact away. And to La Touche it seemed that such a
move would be just what might be expected from a man of Boirac’s
mentality.

But if this theory were correct; if the carter had thus been bound
over to silence, how was the man to be discovered and the truth wrung
from him?

La Touche smoked two cigars over this problem, and then it occurred
to him that the method he had already adopted was sound as far as it
went. It merely did not go far enough.

The only way in which he could ensure finding his hypothetical carter
would be to send a circular to every employer in Paris. But that was
too large an order.

That night, he discussed the matter with the two porters, whom he
found intelligent men and keenly interested in the inquiry. He made
them describe the kind of cart the cask was brought in, then with a
directory he marked off the trades in which the employment of such a
vehicle was likely. When he had finished, though some thousands of
names were included, he did not think the number overwhelming.

For a considerable time he pondered the question of advertising his
circular in the press. At last he decided he could not do so, as if
Boirac saw it he would doubtless take precautions to prevent the
truth becoming known. La Touche therefore returned to the office of
the Business Supplies Company and instructed them to send his
circular to each of the thousands of employers in the selected
trades, they tabulating the replies and giving him the summary.
Though he was by no means sanguine of the success of this move, he
felt it offered a chance.

For the next three evenings La Touche and the porters had a busy
time. White-haired carters turned up at the Hôtel d’Arles literally
in dozens, till the management threatened an ejectment and talked of
a claim for fresh carpets. But all was fruitless. The man they wanted
did not appear.

On the third day, amongst other letters sent on from the Business
Supplies Company, was one which immediately interested La Touche.

‘In reply to your circular letter of the 18th inst.,’ wrote Messrs.
Corot, Fils, of the rue de Rivoli, ‘we have a man in our employment
who, at the end of March, answered your description. His name is Jean
Dubois, of 18b rue de Falaise, near Les Halles. About that time,
however, he ceased shaving and has now grown a beard and moustache.
We have asked him to call with you.’

Was it, thought La Touche, merely a coincidence that this
clean-shaven carter should begin to grow a beard immediately after
the delivery of the cask? When two more days passed and the man did
not turn up, La Touche determined to call on him.

Accordingly the next evening he arranged for Mallet and one of the
porters to deal with the men at the Hôtel d’Arles, while he himself
in company with the other set out to find Dubois. The rue de Falaise
turned out to be a narrow, dirty street of high, sombre buildings,
with the word slum writ large across their grimy frontages. At 18b,
La Touche ascended and knocked at a ramshackle door on a dark stone
landing. It was opened by a slatternly woman, who stood, silently
waiting for him to speak, in the gloom of the threshold. La Touche
addressed her with his usual suavity.

‘Good-evening, madame. Is this where M. Jean Dubois of Messrs. Corot,
Fils lives?’

The woman signified assent, but without inviting her visitor in.

‘I have a little job for him. Could I see him, please?’

‘He’s not in, monsieur.’

‘That’s unfortunate for me and for him too, I fancy. Can you tell me
where I should find him?’

The woman shrugged her shoulders.

‘I cannot tell, monsieur.’ She spoke in a dull, toneless way, as if
the struggle for existence had sapped away all her interest in life.

La Touche took out a five-franc piece and pushed it into her hand.

‘You get hold of him for me,’ he said, ‘I want this little job done
and he could do it. It’ll get him into no trouble, and I’ll pay him
well.’

The woman hesitated. Then, after a few seconds, she said:--

‘If I tell you where he is, will you give me away?’

‘No, on my honour. We shall have found him by accident.’

‘Come this way, then, monsieur.’

She led them down the stairs and out again into the dingy street.
Passing along it like a furtive shadow she turned twice, then halted
at the corner of a third street.

‘Down there, monsieur,’ she pointed. ‘You see that café with the
coloured glass windows? He’ll be in there,’ and without waiting for
an acknowledgment she slipped away, vanishing silently into the gloom.

The two men pushed open the café door and entered a fairly large room
dotted with small marble tables, with a bar in one corner and a
dancing stage at the back. Seating themselves unostentatiously at a
table near the door they called for drinks.

There were some fifteen or twenty men and a few women in the place,
some reading the papers, some playing dominoes, but most lounging in
groups and talking. As La Touche’s keen eye ran over the faces, he
soon spotted his man.

‘Is that he, Charcot?’ he asked, pointing to a small, unhealthy
looking fellow, with a short, untidy, white beard and moustache.

The porter looked cautiously. Then he assented eagerly.

‘It’s the man, monsieur, I believe. The beard changes him a bit, but
I’m nearly sure it’s he.’

The suspect was one of those on the outskirts of a group, to whom a
stout, fussy man with a large nose was holding forth on some
socialistic subject. La Touche crossed over and touched the
white-haired man on the arm.

‘M. Jean Dubois?’

The man started and an expression of fear came into his eyes. But he
answered civilly enough.

‘Yes, monsieur. But I don’t know you.’

‘My name is La Touche. I want a word or two with you. Will you have a
drink with me and my friend here?’

He indicated the porter, Charcot, and they moved over. The fear had
left Dubois’s eyes, but he still looked uneasy. In silence they sat
down.

‘Now Dubois, what will you take?’

When the carter’s wants were supplied, La Touche bent towards him and
began speaking in a low tone:--

‘I dare say, Dubois, you already guess what I want, and I wish to say
before anything else that you have nothing to fear if you are
straight with me. On the contrary, I will give you one hundred francs
if you answer my questions truly. If not--well, I am connected with
the police, and we’ll become better acquainted.’

Dubois moved uneasily as he stammered:--

‘I don’t know what you mean, monsieur.’

‘So that there shall be no mistake, I shall tell you. I want to know
who it was engaged you to take the cask to the rue Cardinet goods
station.’

La Touche, who was watching the other intently, saw him start, while
his face paled and the look of fear returned to his eyes. It was
evident he understood the question. That involuntary motion had given
him away.

‘I assure you, monsieur, I don’t know what you mean. What cask are
you referring to?’

La Touche bent closer.

‘Tell me, do you know what was in that cask? No? Well, I’ll tell you.
There was a body in it--the body of a woman--a murdered woman. Did
you not guess that from the papers? Did you not realise that the cask
you carried to the station was the one that all the papers have been
full of? Now, do you want to be arrested as an accessory after the
fact in a murder case?’

The man was ghastly, and beads of perspiration stood on his forehead.
In a trembling voice he began again to protest his ignorance. La
Touche cut him short.

‘Chut, man! You needn’t keep it up. Your part in the thing is known,
and if it wasn’t you would soon give it away. Dubois, you haven’t red
enough blood for this kind of thing! Be guided by me. Make a clean
breast of it, and I’ll give you the hundred francs, and, what’s more,
I’ll do my best to help you out of your trouble with your employers.
If you don’t, you’ll have to come along now to the Sûreté. Make up
your mind quickly what you’re going to do.’

The man, evidently panic stricken, remained silent. La Touche took
out his watch.

‘I’ll give you five minutes,’ he said, and, leaning back in his
chair, he lit a cigar.

Before the time was up the man spoke.

‘If I tell you everything will you not arrest me?’ His fright was
pitiable.

‘Certainly not. I don’t want to do you any harm. If you give me the
information you go free with a hundred francs in your pocket. But if
you try to deceive me, you can explain your position to-morrow to the
examining magistrate.’

The bluff had its effect.

‘I’ll tell you, monsieur. I’ll tell you the whole truth.’

‘Good,’ said La Touche, ‘then we had better move to a more private
place. We’ll go to my hotel, and you, Charcot’--he turned to the
porter--‘get away back to the rue de Lyon and tell M. Mallet and your
friend the man’s found. Here’s what I owe you and a trifle more.’

Charcot bowed and vanished, while La Touche and the carter, getting
out into one of the larger streets, drove to the rue de la Fayette.

‘Now, Dubois,’ said the detective, when they were seated in his room.

‘I’m going to tell you the gospel truth, monsieur,’ began the carter,
and from his earnest, anxious manner La Touche believed him. ‘And I’m
not going to deny that I was in the wrong, even if I do get the sack
over it. But I was fair tempted, and I thought it was an easy way to
earn a bit of money without doing any one any harm. For that’s the
fact, monsieur. What I did, did no harm to any one.

‘It was on Monday, monsieur, Monday the 29th March, that I was out at
Charenton delivering goods for Messrs. Corot. I stopped at a café
there for a glass of beer. While I was drinking it a man came up to
me and asked was that my cart? I said I was in charge of it, but it
belonged to Messrs. Corot. “I want a little job done with a cart,” he
says, “and it’s not convenient for me to go into Paris to an agent’s,
and if you would save me the trouble by doing it for me I’ll pay you
well.” “I couldn’t do that, monsieur,” I says, “for if my employers
got to know they’d give me the sack.” “But how would they know?” he
asks, “I wouldn’t tell them, and I guess you wouldn’t either.” Well,
monsieur, we talked on, and first I refused, but afterwards I agreed
to do it. I admit I was using the cart like that, but he tempted me.
He said it would only take about an hour, and he would give me ten
francs. So I agreed.’

‘What was this man like?’

‘He was a middle-sized man, monsieur, with a black pointed beard, and
very well dressed.’

‘And what did he want you to do?’

‘On the next Thursday afternoon at half-past four I was to go to an
address he gave me and load up a cask, and bring it to the corner of
the rue de la Fayette, close to the Gare du Nord. He said he would
meet me there and tell me where to take it.’

‘And did he?’

‘Yes. I got there first and waited about ten minutes, and then he
came up. He took the old label off the cask and nailed on another he
had with him. Then he told me to take the cask to the State Railway
Goods Station in the rue Cardinet and book it to London. He gave me
the freight as well as the ten francs for myself. He said he should
know if the cask did not get to London, and threatened that if I
played any tricks he would inform Messrs. Corot what I had done.’

This statement was not at all what La Touche had expected, and he was
considerably puzzled.

‘What was the address he gave you at which you were to get the cask?’

‘I forget the exact address. It was from a large corner house in the
Avenue de l’Alma.’

‘What?’ roared La Touche, springing excitedly to his feet. ‘The
Avenue de l’Alma, do you say?’ He laughed aloud.

So this was it! The cask that went to St. Katherine’s Docks--the cask
containing the body--had gone, not from the Gare du Nord, but direct
from Boirac’s house! Fool that he was not to have thought of this!
Light was at last dawning. Boirac had killed his wife--killed her in
her own house--and had there packed her body in the cask, sending it
direct to Felix. At long last La Touche had got the evidence he
wanted, evidence that would clear Felix--evidence that would bring
Boirac to the scaffold!

He was thrilled with his discovery. For a moment the whole affair
seemed clear, but once again second thoughts showed him there was a
good deal still to be explained. However, once he had got rid of this
Dubois, he would see just where he stood.

He questioned the carter exhaustively, but without gaining much
further information. That the man had no idea of the identity of his
seducer was clear. The only name he had got hold of was that of
Dupierre, for Boirac had instructed him to say at his house that he
had called for Messrs. Dupierre’s cask. Asked if he had not seen the
advertisements of rewards for the information he had now given, the
man said he had, but that he was afraid to come forward. First he
feared he would lose his job if the matter came to his employer’s
ears, and then the very fact that so large a reward was offered had
frightened him, as he assumed he had unwittingly helped with some
crime. He had suspected the matter was one of robbery until he saw of
the discovery of the cask in the papers. Then he had at once guessed
that he had assisted a murderer to dispose of his victim’s body, and
he had lived in a veritable nightmare lest his share in the business
should be discovered. Failing to get anything further out of him, La
Touche finally dismissed him somewhat contemptuously with his hundred
francs. Then he settled himself to try and puzzle out his problem.

And first as to the movements of the cask. It had started from
Boirac’s house; how did it get there? Clearly from Dupierre’s. It
must have been the cask in which Boirac’s statue had been sent home.
That cask, then, left Dupierre’s on the Saturday of the dinner party,
reaching Boirac’s house the same day. It lay there until the
following Thursday. During that time the statue was taken out and the
body substituted. The cask then travelled to London, was taken by
Felix to St. Malo, and finally got into the hands of the police at
Scotland Yard.

But then, what about the cask which was met at Waterloo and sent back
from London to the Gare du Nord?

This, La Touche saw, must have been a different cask, and there must
therefore have been two moving about, and not one as they had
believed. He tried to follow the movements of this second cask. It
left Dupierre’s on the Tuesday evening, reached Waterloo on the
following morning and on next day, Thursday, was sent back to Paris,
reaching the Gare du Nord at 4.45 p.m. It had always been assumed
this cask went from there to the rue Cardinet Goods Station. This was
now proved to have been an error. Where, then, did it go?

Like a flash La Touche saw. It had gone from the Gare du Nord to
Dupierre’s. He looked up his chronology of the case. Yes a cask had
been received by Dupierre on that Thursday evening, but they had
believed it had come from Boirac’s house. And then the whole
diabolical plot began dimly to appear, as La Touche endeavoured to
picture the scene which had probably taken place.

Boirac, he conjectured, must have discovered his wife has eloped with
Felix. Mad with jealousy and hatred he kills her. Then, cooling down
somewhat, he finds himself with the body on his hands. What is he to
do with it? He thinks of the cask standing in the study. He sees that
a better receptacle for getting the body out of the house could
hardly be devised. He therefore unpacks the statue and puts in the
body. The question then arises, where is he to send it? A horrible
idea occurs to him. He will wreak his vengeance on Felix by sending
it to him. And then a second idea strikes him. If he could arrange
that the police would find the body in Felix’s possession, would the
artist not then be suspected and perhaps executed? Truly a ghastly
vengeance! Boirac then types the Le Gautier letter, and sends it to
Felix with the idea of making the artist act in so suspicious a way
that the police will interfere and find him with the body.

So far La Touche felt his surmises had a ring of probability, but he
was still puzzled about the second cask. But, as he turned the matter
over in his mind, he gradually began to see light here too.

Boirac had received a cask from Dupierre with his statue. But as it
had gone to Felix he had no empty cask to send back in its place to
the sculptors. He must return them an empty cask, or else suspicion
falls on him at once. Where is he to get it?

And then La Touche saw that the whole business of the second cask
must have been arranged simply to meet this difficulty. Boirac must
have ordered it, forging Felix’s handwriting. La Touche recollected
that order was written on the same paper as the Le Gautier letter,
suggesting a common origin for both. Boirac met it in London, took it
to the shed, there removed and destroyed the statue, and had the cask
returned to Paris. At the Gare du Nord he doubtless changed the
labels, so that when it reached Dupierre’s it bore that with the
address of his own house. The other label he must have altered from
the Waterloo route to that of long sea. This would account for
Dubois’s statement that Boirac had changed the labels when he met him
in the rue de La Fayette, as well as for the curious faking of that
described by the clerk Broughton.

The more La Touche pondered over this theory, the more satisfied he
became that he had at last reached the truth. But he had to admit
that even yet there were several points he could not understand. When
did the murder take place, and where? Did Madame really elope with
Felix, and, if so, did her husband bring her back alive or dead? How
did the impression of the letter ordering the second statue come to
be on Felix’s blotting paper? If Madame was murdered in Paris, how
did the jewelled pin reach St. Malo?

But in spite of these and other difficulties, La Touche was more than
pleased with his progress, and, as very late he went to his bedroom,
he felt a short investigation should be sufficient to test his
theory, as well as to clear up all that still remained doubtful.




CHAPTER XXIX

A DRAMATIC DÉNOUEMENT

Three days after the finding of the carter, Dubois, and La Touche’s
discovery of what he believed was the true solution of the mystery,
he received a letter which interested him considerably. It came by
post to his hotel, and was as follows--


                                  ‘Rue St. Jean 1,

                                    ‘AVENUE DE L’ALMA

                                         ‘_26th May, 1912_.

‘DEAR MONSIEUR,--In connection with your calls here and inquiries
into the death of my late mistress, I have just by accident hit on a
piece of information which I am sure would be of value to you. It
explains the closing of the front door which, you will recollect, I
heard about 1.0 a.m. on the night of the dinner party. I think it
will have the effect of entirely clearing your client, though I am
afraid it does not point to any one else as the murderer. M. Boirac
is dining out to-night and most of the servants are attending the
marriage festivities of one of the housemaids; the house is therefore
unprotected, and I cannot leave it to call on you, but if you could
see your way to call here any time during the evening, I shall tell
you what I have learnt.

                           ‘Yours respectfully,

                                          ‘HENRI FRANÇOIS.’


‘Extraordinary,’ thought La Touche, ‘how, when you get some
information about a case, more nearly always comes in. Here I worked
for ages on this case without getting any forrader, and François made
no discoveries to encourage me. Now, when I have almost solved it and
it no longer matters, he comes forward with his help. I suppose it’s
the inverse of misfortunes never coming singly.’

He looked at his watch. It was just five o’clock. M. Boirac might not
leave home till nearly eight. If he went a few minutes past that hour
he could see François and hear his news.

He wondered what the butler could have discovered. If it really did
what he claimed--explained the closing of the front door, that would
necessarily clear up much that was still doubtful about the events of
that tragic night.

Suddenly an idea flashed into his mind. Was the letter genuine? He
had never seen the butler’s hand-writing, and therefore could form no
opinion from its appearance. But was the whole thing _likely_? Could
it possibly be the work of Boirac? Might not the manufacturer have
discovered that he, La Touche, was on his trail, and might not this
be a trap? Could it be an attempt to lure him into a house in which
he and his information would be at the manufacturer’s mercy?

This was a sinister idea, and he sat pondering its possibility for
some minutes. On the whole, he was disposed to reject it. Any attempt
on his life or liberty would be exceedingly risky for Boirac. If he
really knew what had come out, his game would surely be to collect
what money he could and disappear while there was yet time. All the
same La Touche felt he should neglect no precaution for his own
safety.

He went to the telephone and called up the house in the Avenue de
l’Alma.

‘Is M. François there?’ he asked, when he had got through.

‘No, monsieur,’ was the reply. ‘He has gone out for the afternoon. He
will be in about 7.30.’

‘Thank you. Who is speaking, please?’

‘Jules, monsieur, the footman. I am in charge till M. François
returns.’

This was unsatisfactory, but quite natural and unsuspicious. La
Touche felt fairly satisfied, and yet, almost against his will, a
doubt remained. He thought he might be better with company, and made
another call.

‘That you, Mallet? Which of you is off duty? You? Well, I want your
company to-night on a short excursion. Will you call round for dinner
here at seven and we can go on afterwards?’

When Mallet arrived, La Touche showed him the letter. The subordinate
took precisely the same view as his chief.

‘I don’t think it’s a plant,’ he said, ‘but with Boirac you can’t be
too careful. I should bring your John Cockerill, or whatever you use,
if I were you.’

‘I’ll do so,’ said the other, slipping an automatic pistol into his
pocket.

They reached the house in the Avenue de l’Alma about 8.15, and La
Touche rang. To their surprise and disappointment the door was opened
by no less a person than Boirac himself. He seemed to be on the point
of going out, as he wore his hat and a dark, caped overcoat which,
open at the front, showed his evening dress. Round his right hand was
tied a blood-stained handkerchief. He appeared annoyed and as if his
temper might give way at any minute. He looked inquiringly at the
detectives.

‘Could we see M. François, monsieur,’ asked La Touche politely.

‘If you don’t mind waiting a few minutes, certainly,’ answered
Boirac. ‘I was just going out when I cut my hand and I had to send
him for a doctor to stop the bleeding. He will be back in a moment.
If you like to wait, you can do so in his room--the fourth door on
the right.’

La Touche hesitated a moment. What if it was a plant after all?
Finding Boirac here alone was certainly suspicious. But the cut at
least was genuine. La Touche could see the red stain slowly spreading
across the handkerchief.

‘Well, messieurs, I’m sorry I can’t hold the door open. Kindly either
come in and wait, or, if you prefer it, call back later on.’

La Touche made up his mind. They were armed and on their guard. As he
entered the hall his left hand in his overcoat pocket crept to the
handle of his magazine pistol, and he quietly covered the
manufacturer.

The latter closed the front door behind them and led the way to
François’s room. It was in darkness, but Boirac, entering before the
others, turned on the light.

‘Come in and be seated, gentlemen, if you please,’ he said. ‘I should
like a word with you before François returns.’

La Touche did not at all like the turn affairs were taking. Boirac’s
conduct seemed to him to grow more and more suspicious. Then he
reflected again that they were two to one, were armed, and keenly on
their guard, and that there could be no cause for uneasiness.
Besides, there could be no trap. Boirac had preceded them into the
room.

The manufacturer pulled together three chairs.

‘If you would kindly be seated, gentlemen, I would tell you what I
want you to know.’

The detectives obeyed, La Touche still keeping his pistol turned on
his host.

‘Gentlemen,’ went on the latter, ‘I owe you both a very full apology
for having played a trick on you, but I am sure, when I have
explained the extraordinary circumstances in which I am placed, you
will hold me, if not justified, at least excused. And first, I must
tell you that I know who you are, and on what business you came to
Paris.’

He paused for a moment. Then, the others not replying, he continued:--

‘I happened to notice your advertisement, M. La Touche, for Mlle.
Lambert, and it set me thinking. And when I found, M. Mallet, that
you and your friend were shadowing me, I thought still more. As a
result of my cogitations I employed a private detective, and learnt
from him the identity of both of you and what you were engaged on.
When I learnt that you had found Mlle. Lambert, I guessed you would
soon discover the typewriter, and sure enough, my detective soon
after reported that you had purchased a second-hand No. 7 Remington.
Then I had the carter, Dubois, shadowed, and I thus learnt that you
had discovered him also. I have to compliment you, M. La Touche, on
the cleverness with which you found out these matters.’

Again he paused, looking inquiringly and somewhat hesitatingly at the
others.

‘Pray proceed, M. Boirac,’ said La Touche at last.

‘First, then, I offer you my apologies for the trick played you. I
wrote the note which brought you here. I feared if I wrote in my own
name you would suspect some trick on my part and refuse to come.’

‘Not unnaturally a suspicion of the kind did enter our minds,’
answered La Touche. ‘It is but fair to tell you, M. Boirac, that we
are armed’--La Touche withdrew his automatic pistol from his pocket
and laid it on a table at his hand--‘and if you give either of us the
slightest cause for anxiety, we shall fire without waiting to make
inquiries.’

The manufacturer smiled bitterly.

‘I am not surprised at your suspicions. They are reasonable, though
absolutely unfounded, and your precautions cannot therefore be
offensive to me. As I try to do everything thoroughly, I may admit
this cut on my hand was also faked. I simply squeezed a tube of
liquid red paint on to the handkerchief. I did it to account for my
being alone in the hall when you arrived, which I thought necessary,
lest you might refuse to enter.’

La Touche nodded.

‘Pray proceed with your statement,’ he said again.

For a man of his years, Boirac looked strangely old and worn. His
black hair was flecked with white, his face drawn and unhappy and his
eyes weary and sombre. Though he had been speaking quietly enough, he
seemed deeply moved and at a loss how to proceed. At last, with a
gesture of despair, he went on:--

‘What I have to say is not easy, but, alas, I deserve that. I may
tell you at once without any beating about the bush--I brought you
here to-night to make my confession. Yes, gentlemen, you see before
you the miserable, guilty man. I killed her, gentlemen. I did it that
awful night of the dinner party. And since then I have never known
one moment’s ease. What I have suffered no living being could
describe. I have been in hell ever since. I have aged more in these
last few weeks than in ten years of ordinary life. And now, when to
the gnawings of remorse the certainty of the result of your
researches is looming before me--I can bear it no longer. The
suspense must end. Therefore, after much thought I have decided to
make my confession.’

That the man was in earnest and his emotion genuine La Touche could
no longer doubt. But his suspicions still remained. He asked a
question.

‘Why have you brought us here to tell us, M. Boirac? Surely the
obvious thing would have been for you to go to the Sûreté and see M.
Chauvet.’

‘I know. I should have done that. But this was easier. I tell you,
gentlemen, it is bad enough to have to say this to you here, sitting
quietly in my own house. There--with several and perhaps stupid
officials, with typists--I just couldn’t face it. What I want you to
do is this: I will tell you everything. Any questions you ask I will
answer. Then I don’t want to be bothered with it again. All I now
hope for is that the end will come quickly. You do what is necessary
and at the trial I will plead guilty. You will agree?’

‘We will hear what you have to say.’

‘For that, at least, I am grateful.’ He pulled himself together with
an obvious effort and continued in a low tone, without showing very
evident traces of emotion.

‘My statement, I fear, will be a long one, as I must tell you all
that occurred from the beginning, so that you may understand what led
up to this awful consummation. A great part of it you already
know--how my wife and Felix fell in love at the art school, and how
her father refused his consent to their marriage, then how I, too,
fell a victim and asked her hand; how my suit was looked upon with
favour and I was misled both by herself and her father about what had
taken place at the art school, and how, in short, we were married.
And you know, too, I imagine, that our marriage from the first was a
failure. I loved Annette intensely, but she never cared for me. We
needn’t go into it, but I soon saw that she had only married me in a
fit of despair at her engagement being broken off. She did me the
gravest wrong, though I admit I don’t think she meant or realised it.
We drifted farther and farther apart, till life together became
insupportable. And then I met Felix and asked him to the house, not
knowing till weeks later that he was the man who had been in love
with my wife at the art school. But you must not think I have
anything to say against the honour of either of them. My wife spoiled
my life it is true, but she did not elope with Felix, nor did he, so
far as I know, ask her to. They were good friends, but, to the best
of my belief, nothing more. That is the smallest and the only
reparation I can make them, and I make it unreservedly.

‘But with me, alas, it was different. Balked of any chance of
happiness in my home through my wife’s wicked action--I say it
advisedly--her wicked action in marrying me while she loved another,
I succumbed to the temptation to look elsewhere for happiness. I met,
quite by accident, some one with whom I could have been happy. You
will never learn who she was or how I managed to meet her without
being suspected--it is enough to say that things reached such a pass
that this woman and I found we could no longer go on in the way we
were, meeting by stealth, seeing each other only with carefully
thought-out precautions. The situation was intolerable and I
determined to end it. And it was on the evening of the dinner party
that I first saw the way.

‘But here, before I go on to tell you the events of that terrible
night, lest you might try to find this woman and saddle her with a
part of the responsibility for what followed, let me tell you that
here again I lost. The week after I destroyed my soul with the
ghastly crime of which I will tell you, she got a chill. It turned to
pneumonia, and in four days she was dead. I saw the judgment of
Heaven beginning. But that is for me alone. Her name, at any rate, is
safe. You will never find it out.’

Boirac’s voice had fallen still lower. He spoke in a sort of
toneless, numb way, as if mechanically, and yet his hearers could see
that only his iron control prevented a breakdown.

‘On that night of the dinner party,’ he resumed, ‘I met Felix
accidentally in the hall on his arrival, and brought him into my
study to see an etching. It is true we there spoke of the cask which
had just arrived with my group, but I gave him no information such as
would have enabled him to obtain a similar one.

‘All that has been found out of the events of that evening up to the
time that I left the works is true. It is true I thought at first I
would be kept till late, and afterwards got away comparatively early.
I actually left the works about eleven, took the Metro and changed at
Châtelet, as I said, but from there my statement to the police was
false. No American friend clapped me on the back as I alighted there,
nor did such a man exist at all. My walk with him to the Quai
d’Orsay, our further stroll round the Place de la Concorde, his going
by train to Orléans, and my walk home--all these were pure inventions
on my part, made to account for my time between eleven-fifteen and
one. What really happened during this time was as follows:

‘I changed at Châtelet, taking the Maillot train for Alma, and walked
home down the Avenue. I must have reached my house about twenty
minutes or a quarter to twelve.

‘I took out my latchkey as I mounted the steps, and then I noticed
that one of the slats of the venetian blind of the drawing-room
window looking out towards the porch had caught up at one end, and a
long, thin, triangular block of light shone out into the night. It
was just on the level of my eyes and involuntarily I glanced through.
What I saw inside stiffened me suddenly and I stood looking. In an
arm-chair in the farther part of the room sat my wife, and bending
closely over her, with his back towards me, was Felix. They were
alone, and, as I watched, a plan entered my mind, and I stood
transfixed with my pulses throbbing. Was there something between my
wife and Felix? And if not, would it not suit my purpose to assume
there was? I continued looking in and presently Felix rose to his
feet and they began talking earnestly, Felix gesticulating freely, as
was his habit. Then my wife left the room, returning in a few moments
and handing him a small object. I was too far off to see what it was,
but it seemed like a roll of banknotes. Felix put it carefully in his
pocket and then they turned and walked towards the hall. In a few
seconds the door opened and I shrank down into the shadows below the
window sill.

‘“Oh, Léon,” I heard my wife’s voice, and it seemed charged with
emotion. “Oh, Léon, how good you are! How glad I am you have been
able to do this!”

‘Felix’s voice showed that he also was moved.

‘“Dear lady, is not such happiness to me? You know I am always at
your service.”

‘He moved down the steps.

‘“You’ll write?”

‘“Immediately,” he answered, and was gone.

‘As the door closed, a furious passion of hate burned up in me for
this woman who had ruined my life--who had not only ruined it, but
who was still blocking out any chance of happiness I might have had.
And also I furiously and jealously hated Felix for being the cause,
however innocent, of my loss. And then suddenly I felt as if--perhaps
I should say I felt that--a devil had entered and taken possession of
me. I became deadly cold and I had the strange feeling that I myself
was not really there, but that I was watching some one else. I
slipped out my key, noiselessly opened the door, and followed my wife
into the drawing-room. Her calm, nonchalant walk across the room
roused me to still wilder fury. How well I knew her every motion.
This was the way she would have turned to greet me when I arrived
from the works, with cold politeness--when it might have been so
different. . . .

‘She reached her chair in the corner of the room and turned to sit
down. As she did so she saw me. She gave a little scream.

‘“Raoul, how you startled me,” she cried. “Have you just arrived?”

‘I threw off my hat and she saw my face.

‘“Raoul,” she cried again, “what’s the matter? Why do you look like
that?”

‘I stood and looked at her. Outwardly I was calm, inwardly my blood
whirled like molten metal through my veins and my mind was a seething
fire.

‘“Nothing really,” I said, and some one else seemed to be speaking in
a voice I had never heard before, a hoarse, horrible voice. “Only a
mere trifle. Only Madame entertaining her lover after her husband has
come home.”

‘She staggered back as if from a blow and collapsed into her chair,
and turned her now pallid face to me.

‘“Oh!” she cried in a trembling, choking voice. “Raoul, it’s not
true! It’s not true, Raoul, I swear it! Don’t you believe me, Raoul?”

‘I stepped close to her. My hate swelled up in a blinding, numbing,
overwhelming passion. It must have shown in my eyes, for a sudden
fear leapt into hers.

‘She tried to scream, but her dry throat produced only a piteous
little cry. Her face had grown ghastly. Drops of sweat grew on her
brow.

‘I was close by her now. Instinctively my hands went out. I seemed to
feel her slender neck between them, with my thumbs pressing. . . .
She read my purpose, for a hideous terror shone in her eyes. Dimly I
was conscious of her hands tearing at my face. . . .

‘I stopped. My brain was numb. I seemed to see myself from a great
distance standing looking at her. She was dead. I hated her more than
ever. I was glad to see her dead, to watch that horror still
lingering in her eyes. And he? How I hated him, he who had lost me my
love and spoilt my life. I would go now. I would follow him and I
would kill him. Kill him as I had killed her. I stumbled blindly to
find the door.

‘And then the devil that possessed me suggested another plan. He had
wanted her. Well, he would get her. If he couldn’t have her alive, he
could have the next best thing. He could have her dead.’

M. Boirac paused. He had been speaking in a high-pitched voice and
gesticulating as if overwhelmed with excitement. He seemed
unconscious of his hearers, as if, carried away by his recollections,
he was mentally living over again the awful scene, passing once more
through the frenzy of that terrible time. Then after a few moments’
silence he pulled himself together and went on in a more normal tone.

‘I determined to send the body to Felix, not only to satisfy my hate,
but in the hope that his efforts to get rid of it would bring
suspicion of the murder on him. Where, I wondered, could I get a
receptacle in which to send it? And then it occurred to me that in
the study adjoining was the cask that had just arrived with my
statue. It was large, strongly made and bound with iron. It would
suit my purpose admirably.

‘I crossed to the study and unpacked the group. Then quite coolly I
carried the body in and placed it in the cask. The idea that I must
divert suspicion from myself grew in my mind, and I therefore took
off my wife’s evening shoes as their presence would tend to show she
had not left the house. I filled up the cask with sawdust, ramming it
tight. The body being so much larger than the group, there was a lot
of sawdust over. This I swept up with the clothes brush from the hall
and put in a handbag, which I locked. Finally I replaced the wooden
top of the cask loosely as before, though still strongly enough not
to come out if the cask was moved. When I had finished no one would
have suspected that anything had been tampered with.

‘It was my intention to create the impression that my wife had gone
away with Felix. To this end two things appeared immediately
necessary. Firstly, such of her outdoor clothes as she probably would
have worn must disappear. I accordingly picked up the group and her
shoes and went to her room. There I threw the shoes down carelessly
before a chair, as if she had changed them. I took her fur coat, a
hat, and a pair of walking shoes, and, with the group, carried them
to my dressing-room. The only place I could think of for hiding them
was in a couple of empty portmanteaux, so I packed the group in one
and the clothes in another, carefully locking both.

‘The second point was to produce a letter purporting to be from my
wife to myself, in which she would say she loved Felix and had gone
away with him. I had not time to write one then, but for temporary
purposes I put an old letter of my own into a new envelope,
addressing it to myself as best I could in my wife’s hand. This I
left on my desk.

‘I had already spent over three-quarters of an hour and it was nearly
one. I took a final look round to see that nothing had been
forgotten, and was just leaving the drawing-room when my eye caught a
glint of light from the carpet immediately behind the chair in which
my wife had died. I stepped over and saw it was a brooch which had
evidently been torn from her dress during the struggle. I broke out
into a cold sweat as I thought how nearly I had missed it, and
realised that its discovery by some one else might have disproved my
story and brought me to the scaffold. With no clear idea except to
hide it, I put it in my waistcoat pocket, took my hat, and, letting
myself out, drew the door sharply behind me. After strolling as far
as the Champs Élysées and back, I re-entered with my key. As I had
hoped and intended, the shutting of the front door had been heard,
and I found the butler obviously uneasy at my wife’s disappearance. I
endeavoured to confirm his suspicions that she had gone away with
Felix, and, as you know, completely succeeded.

‘Most of that night I spent in my study working out my plans. There
was first of all the cask. A cask had been sent me by Dupierre, and
it was obvious I must return them an empty one against it or I would
give myself away. Where was this empty one to come from?

‘It was clear to me that I must get a precisely similar cask to
return, and the only way I could do so would be to order another
group, in the hope that it would be sent packed in the same way. But
obviously I could not have this group sent to me. The idea then
occurred to me that I must write in some imaginary name ordering the
statue to be delivered at some place such as a station cloak-room, to
be kept till called for. There I could get it without letting my
identity become known.

‘But this plan did not please me. I was afraid the police would be
able to trace me. I thought over it again, and then I saw that if I
ordered it in Felix’s name it would meet the case. It would account
for his getting the cask I was sending him, and he would not be
believed when he denied ordering it. But I couldn’t give Felix’s name
and address, for then he might get both casks, and I would be as
badly fixed as ever. Finally I worked out the plan you know. I forged
an order in Felix’s hand for the companion group to my own to be sent
to Felix at an imaginary address, made a tracing of it, left the
letter in Dupierre’s letter-box on Monday night, telephoned them on
Tuesday morning ascertaining by what route and train they were
sending the group, went to London, met it and had it left in a shed
there, all as you must have learnt.’

‘A moment, please,’ interrupted La Touche. ‘You are going a little
too quickly for me. You say you made a tracing of your forged order
for the companion group and left the letter in Dupierre’s letter-box.
I don’t quite understand that.’

‘Oh, you hadn’t found that out, had you not? I will explain. I was in
Paris, you see, when I forged the letter. But Dupierre must believe
it came to him from London, or his suspicions would be aroused. I met
the difficulty by sticking on the envelope a cancelled stamp from a
letter I had received from London, copying the remainder of the
postmark with a little lampblack. Then I went down to Grenelle in the
middle of Monday night and dropped the letter into Dupierre’s box. He
would find it next morning all correct with its English stamp,
cancelled in a London office.’

In spite of their loathing for this callous and cynical criminal, La
Touche and Mallet could not but be impressed by the cleverness of the
trick. All the detectives concerned had argued that as the order for
the statue had been received apparently from London on Tuesday, it
must have been posted there on Monday, and that as Felix was there
and Boirac in Paris, the former must have posted it. But how simply
they had been duped! Truly, thought the detectives with unwilling
admiration, Boirac had deserved to succeed.

‘But the tracing?’ persisted La Touche.

‘I thought that not only must Dupierre believe the letter came from
London, but some definite proof that Felix had written it must be
provided. I did it in this way. After I had written the letter I made
a careful tracing of it on a bit of tracing paper. As you probably
know, I visited St. Malo when in London, and there, with Felix’s pen
and ink, I retraced over the writing and blotted it. This gave the
impression.’

Again his hearers had to admit a rueful admiration for the ingenious
ruse. The finding of the impression had seemed so conclusive, and--it
was only a trick. And what a simple trick--when you knew it!

‘That is quite clear, thank you,’ said La Touche.

‘I met the cask in London and brought it to the shed,’ went on the
manufacturer. ‘There, after dismissing the carter, I opened the cask,
took out the statue, packed it in a portmanteau I had with me, took
the label off the cask and put it carefully in my pocket, replacing
it with one addressed to Jacques de Belleville at the Gare du Nord.
As you know, this Jacques de Belleville was myself.

‘As you found Dubois, the carter, you will have learnt the method by
which I exchanged the casks, sending that containing the body from my
house to Felix, while the other, which I had emptied in London, went
back to Dupierre. You understand that part of it?’

‘Perfectly.’

‘So much then for the getting of the body to Felix. But it was my
desire not only to give him the shock of opening the cask and
discovering it; I wished also to make the police suspicious so that
he would be watched and his attempts to get rid of the corpse
discovered. In this case I intended he should be charged with the
murder, incidentally clearing me. To ensure this result I set myself
to construct such evidence as would weave a net round him from which
he would be unable to escape. Gradually the details of my plan
arranged themselves in my mind.

‘Firstly, it was necessary that I should really have the letter of
farewell, the envelope of which I had prepared, and which I had
pretended to find on going to my study. Collecting a number of
specimens of my wife’s handwriting from her davenport, I forged the
letter I showed to the French police. Putting it away for future use,
I burnt the specimens to prevent them from being compared with the
forgery.

‘The problem of getting Felix to meet the cask which I intended to
send him, and while doing so to attract the attention of the police,
then occupied my thoughts. After much consideration I decided on the
plan you know. It happened that some three weeks previously I had
been seated in the Café Toisson d’Or, when a bad neuralgic headache
had come on, and I had moved into an alcove to be as private as
possible. While there I had seen Felix come in and begin talking to a
group of men. I had not made myself known, as I was in considerable
pain, but I had overheard their conversation and learnt the
arrangement Felix and his friend Le Gautier had made about the
lottery. This I now decided to use, and I drafted a letter to Felix
purporting to come from Le Gautier, mentioning this matter of the
lottery to make it seem genuine. I also drafted a slip about money I
intended to send in the cask. The contents of this letter and slip
you know. These I put away in my pocket-book, to be used later.

‘The next evening, Monday, I pretended to unpack the cask. I brought
the group I had taken out of it on the previous Saturday from the
portmanteau in which I had hidden it, and placed it on the table in
my study. On the floor, about the cask, I sprinkled some of the
sawdust from the handbag. By this manœuvre I hoped if suspicion arose
it would be argued that as the cask was not unpacked till Monday
night, the body could not have been put into it on the night of the
dinner. As you know, this ruse also succeeded. I also took the label
off the cask and put it in my pocket.

‘Opening the cask again, I put in £52 10s. in English gold, to
correspond with my slip. I hoped that, if the police got hold of the
cask, they would assume that Felix had put in this money in order to
strengthen his story that the cask had been sent to him. I put in
sovereigns instead of French gold with the intention of making this
theory more likely, as I hoped it would be argued that Felix in his
agitation had overreached himself, and forgotten from what country
the cask was supposed to be coming.

‘Calling François, I told him I had unpacked the statue, and when
Messrs. Dupierre sent for the cask he was to give it to them. Then,
informing him that I would be from home for a couple of nights, I
left next morning by the early train for London.

‘On the Monday I had purchased a false beard and arranged to get
myself up to resemble Felix, and I wore this disguise all the time
till my return. I brought with me on the journey the portmanteau
containing my wife’s clothes, and, on board the boat, from a quiet
place on the lower deck, slipped these articles overboard without
being observed. On arrival in London I arranged with a carting firm
to carry about the cask on the next two days, as you already know. I
then went out to St. Malo, Felix’s house, which I found after some
judicious inquiries. A careful reconnoitre showed me it was
unoccupied. I tried round the windows and had the luck to find one
unhasped. Opening it, I crept into the house and went to the study.
There by the light of an electric torch I carefully inked over the
tracing I had made of the forged letter ordering the cask, and
blotted it on Felix’s pad. This, I felt sure, would be found, and
would seem to prove that he had written the order.

‘I had foreseen that it would be argued that Felix must be innocent
because not only would he have no motive to murder my wife, but also
he would naturally be the last man in the world to do such a thing.
It was necessary for me, therefore, to provide a motive. For this
purpose I had written a letter purporting to be from a girl whom
Felix had wronged. Having crumpled this letter I put it into the side
pocket of one of Felix’s coats. I hoped this would be found, and that
it would be argued that my wife had got hold of it and that there had
been a quarrel which led to her death. Crumpling it was to suggest
Felix had snatched it from her, thrust it into his pocket and
forgotten it.

‘As I stood in the study a further idea occurred to me. I had thought
of a use for a brooch that had dropped from my wife’s clothes. It had
fallen just behind the chair she had been sitting in, and I thought
if I placed it on the floor behind a chair in his room, it would
suggest she had been murdered here. My eye fell on a chair with a low
back, standing in front of a curtain, and I saw at once it would suit
my purpose. I dropped the brooch behind it and it caught on the braid
at the bottom of the curtain. There it was hidden from casual
inspection by the chair, but I knew the police would not overlook it.
I withdrew without disturbing anything or leaving traces, closed the
window, and returned to the city.

‘Such was my plot, and, but for your cleverness, it would have
succeeded. Is there any other point on which you are not clear?’

‘Only one, I think,’ answered La Touche. ‘You were heard to telephone
on the Monday from the Café at Charenton to your butler and chief
clerk. They received their messages on the Tuesday from Calais. How
did you manage that?’

‘Easily. I never telephoned on Monday at all. I slipped a tiny wooden
wedge into the instrument to prevent the hook rising when I lifted
off the receiver. No call was therefore made on the exchange, though
I went through the form of speaking. Any other point?’

‘I do not think so,’ returned La Touche, who again could not but feel
a kind of rueful admiration for this ingenious ruffian. ‘Your
statement has been very complete.’

‘It is not quite complete,’ M. Boirac resumed. ‘There are two more
points of which I wish to speak. Read that.’

He took a letter from his pocket and handed it to La Touche. Both men
leaned a little forward to look. As they did so there was a slight
click and the light went out. What sounded like Boirac’s chair was
heard falling.

‘Hold the door!’ yelled La Touche, springing to his feet and fumbling
for his electric torch. Mallet leaped for the door, but, tripping
over the chair, missed it. As La Touche flashed on his light they
could see it closing. There was a low, mocking laugh. Then the door
slammed and they heard the key turn in the lock. La Touche fired
rapidly through the panels, but there was no sound from without. Then
Mallet flung himself on the handle. But at his first touch it came
off. The holes for the screws had been enlarged so that they had no
hold.

The door opened inwards, and presented to the imprisoned men a
smooth, unbroken surface, with nothing on which to pull. To push it
towards the hall was impossible, as it shut solidly against the
frame. Their only hope seemed to split it, but as they gazed at its
solid oak timbers this hope died.

‘The window,’ cried La Touche, and they swung round. The sashes
opened readily, but outside were shutters of steel plate, closely
fastened. Both men shoved and prised with all their might. But Boirac
had done his work well. They were immovable.

As they stood panting and baffled, Mallet’s eye caught the switch of
the electric light. It was off. He clicked it on. Though no answering
flood of light poured down, he noticed something that interested him.

‘Your torch, La Touche!’ he cried, and then he saw what it was. Tied
to the switch was a length of fisherman’s gut. Practically invisible,
it passed down the wall and through a tiny hole in the floor. Any one
pulling it from below would switch off the light.

‘I don’t understand,’ said La Touche. ‘That means he had a
confederate?’

‘No!’ cried Mallet, who had been looking about with the torch. ‘See
here!’

He pointed to the chair Boirac had occupied and which now lay on its
side on the floor. Fastened to the left arm was another end of gut
which also entered a hole in the floor.

‘I bet those are connected!’

Their curiosity temporarily overcame their fears. La Touche turned on
the switch and Mallet, pulling the gut at the arm of the chair, heard
it click off again.

‘Ingenious devil,’ he muttered. ‘It must go round pulleys under the
floor. And now he has cut off the current at the meter.’

‘Come on, Mallet,’ La Touche called. ‘Don’t waste time. We must get
out of this.’

Together they threw themselves on the door with all the weight of
their shoulders. Again they tried, and again, but to no purpose. It
was too strong.

‘What does it mean, do you think?’ panted Mallet.

‘Gas, I expect. Perhaps charcoal.’

‘Any use shouting at the window?’

‘None. It’s too closely shuttered, and it only opens into a
courtyard.’

And then suddenly they perceived a faint odour which, in spite of
their hardened nerves, turned their blood cold and set them working
with ten times more furious energy at the door. It was a very slight
smell of burning wood.

‘My God!’ cried Mallet, ‘he’s set the house on fire!’

It seemed impossible that any door could withstand so furious an
onslaught. Had it opened outwards, hinges and lock must long since
have given away, but the men could not make their strength tell. They
worked till the sweat rolled in great drops down their foreheads.
Meanwhile the smell increased. Smoke must be percolating into the
room.

‘The torch here,’ cried La Touche suddenly.

Taking his pistol, he fired a number of shots on the bolt of the lock.

‘Don’t use them all. How many have you?’

‘Two more.’

‘Keep them.’

The lock seemed shattered, but still the door held. The men’s efforts
were becoming frenzied when Mallet had an idea. Along the farther
wall of the room stood a heavy, old-fashioned sofa.

‘Let’s use the couch as a battering-ram.’

The room was now thick with smoke, biting and gripping the men’s
throats. Hampered by coughing and bad light, they could not work
fast. But at last they got the couch across the room and planted end
on to the door. Standing one at each side, they swung it back and
then with all their strength drove it against the timber. A second
time they drove, and a third, till at the fourth blow there was a
sound of splitting wood, and the job was done.

Or so they thought. A moment later they found their mistake. The
right bottom panel only was gone.

‘The left panel! Then the bar between!’

Though the men worked feverishly, their operations took time. The
smoke was now increasing rapidly. And then suddenly La Touche heard a
terrible, ominous sound. Crackling was beginning somewhere not far
off.

‘We haven’t much time, Mallet,’ he gasped, as the sweat poured down
his face.

Desperately they drove the couch against the bar. Still it held. The
terrible fear that the couch would come to pieces was in both their
hearts.

‘The torch!’ cried Mallet hoarsely. ‘Quick, or we’re done!’

Drawing his magazine pistol and holding it close to the door, he
fired its full charge of seven shots at the vertical bar. La Touche
instantly grasped his idea, and emptied his two remaining shots at
the same place. The bar was thus perforated by a transverse line of
nine holes.

There was a singing in the men’s ears and a weight on their chests
as, with the energy of despair, they literally hurled the heavy couch
against the weakened bar. With a tearing sound it gave way. They
could get through.

‘You for it, Mallet! Quick!’ yelled La Touche, as he staggered
drunkenly back. But there was no answer. Through the swirling clouds
the detective could see his assistant lying motionless. That last
tremendous effort had finished him.

La Touche’s own head was swimming. He could no longer think
connectedly. Half unconsciously he pulled the other’s arms to the
hole. Then, passing through, he turned to draw his confrère out. But
the terrible roaring was swelling in his ears, the weight on his
chest was growing insupportable, and a black darkness was coming down
over him like a pall. Insensible, he collapsed, half in and half out
of the doorway.

As he fell there was a lurid flicker and a little dancing flame
leaped lightly from the floor.




CHAPTER XXX

CONCLUSION

When La Touche’s senses returned he found himself lying in the open
air, with Farol, his other assistant, bending over him. His first
thought was for his companion in misfortune.

‘Mallet?’ he whispered feebly.

‘Safe,’ answered Farol. ‘We got him out just in time.’

‘And Boirac?’

‘The police are after him.’

La Touche lay still. He was badly shaken. But the fresh air rapidly
revived him, and he was soon able to sit up.

‘Where am I?’ he asked presently.

‘Just round the corner from Boirac’s. The firemen are at work.’

‘Tell me about it.’

Farol’s story was short. It seemed that Boirac had returned home that
afternoon about three. Shortly after, the detective had been
surprised to observe a regular exodus of servants from the house.
Cabs and taxis took away two men and four women, all with luggage.
Lastly, about four o’clock, came François, also with luggage, and
with him Boirac. François closed and locked the door, handing the key
to his master. The two then shook hands and, stepping into separate
vehicles, were driven away. It was evident the house was being closed
for a considerable period.

Farol, entering the taxi he kept in waiting, followed. They drove to
the Gare St. Lazare, where the manufacturer dismissed his vehicle and
entered the station. But instead of taking a ticket, he simply walked
about the concourse and in a few minutes left by another door.
Travelling by the Metro, he reached Alma Station, walked down the
Avenue, and, with a hurried look round, re-entered the house. To
Farol it was obvious that something was in the wind. He withdrew to
some distance and watched.

His surprise at these strange proceedings was not lessened when he
saw La Touche and Mallet drive up to the door and ring. He hurried
forward to warn them, but before he could do so the door opened and
they disappeared within. Growing more and more anxious, Farol waited
till, after a considerable time, he saw Boirac leave the house alone.
Now certain that something was wrong, he decided he must let the
manufacturer go, while he telephoned his suspicions to the Sûreté. A
car with some men was sent immediately, and they drove up to the door
just as Farol returned to it on foot. Smoke was beginning to issue
from the upper windows, and one man was sent for the fire brigade,
while others attempted to break into the house. In this they
succeeded only after considerable trouble. Through the smoke they saw
La Touche’s body lying half in the hall and half in François’s room.
Only just in time they got the men out, the back of the hall being a
sheet of flame before they reached the open air.

‘We better go to the Sûreté,’ said La Touche, who, by this time, had
practically recovered.

Twenty minutes later M. Chauvet was in possession of the facts, and
operations for the tracing of Boirac had begun.

La Touche then confidentially told the Chief all that he had learnt
about the mystery. M. Chauvet was utterly astounded, and chagrined
beyond measure at the blunder he and his men had fallen into.

‘Clever devil!’ he exclaimed. ‘He knew that nothing but the absolute
truth would put you off your guard. But we’ll get him, M. La Touche.
He can’t get out of the city. By now, every route will be barred.’

The Chief’s prophecy was fulfilled earlier than even he expected.
Only an hour later they had news. Evidently believing himself secure
in the destruction of the only two men who, so far as he was aware,
knew enough to convict him, Boirac, after setting the house on fire,
had gone openly to his club. A detective who went there to make
inquiries, found him calmly sitting smoking in the lounge. He had, it
appeared, made a desperate effort to escape arrest, and attempted to
shoot the officer. Then, seeing it was all up with him, he turned the
revolver upon himself, and, before he could be stopped, shot himself
through the head.

So perished one of the most callous and cold-blooded criminals of the
century.

In a curious manner Felix received his reparation. Heppenstall, who
had learnt to respect and appreciate his client, engaged him to paint
a portrait of his wife. While thus occupied the artist made the
acquaintance of the K. C.’s daughter. The two young people promptly
fell in love. Six months later they were quietly married, and, his
bride bringing a not inconsiderable dot, Felix threw up his
appointment and moved to a new St. Malo on the sunny shores of the
Mediterranean. Here he divided his attention between his young wife
and the painting of that masterpiece which had so long remained an
unattainable dream.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Cask, by Freeman Wills Crofts

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CASK ***

***** This file should be named 59854-0.txt or 59854-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/9/8/5/59854/

Produced by Stephen Lins
Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

